See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318645657
Correctional Education and Recidivism: Toward a Tool for Reduction
Article · March 2015
CITATIONS
40
READS
10,628
1 author:
Lori Hall
Virginia Tech
3 PUBLICATIONS   78 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Lori Hall on 23 July 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
4
Correctional Education and Recidivism: 
Toward a Tool for Reduction
Lori L. Hall
Please address correspondence regarding this article to Lori L. Hall,  
Doctoral Student, Virginia Tech, 430-C Chinquapin Trail,  
Christiansburg, VA 24073, llhall@vt.edu.
Acknowledgments: The author would like to thank Dr. Doris Chu, Dr. Larry 
Salinger, and Dr. Thomas Ratliff for their invaluable knowledge, comments, and 
time throughout this project. Without their support this project would not have 
been possible.
Abstract
Vast arrays of research have evaluated recidivism through a limited scope, analyzing 
various factors independently. This study endeavors to execute a systematic review of 
factors attributed to recidivism in order to focus the research trajectory toward the most 
promising recidivism reduction tool. Various risk factors of recidivism have been identified; 
however few can be utilized as a tool in reduction. Of those tools, research indicates that 
correctional education programming appears to offer the greatest reduction outcome. 
The importance of this research is established by reorganizing the major research findings 
on correctional education programs from 1995 to 2010 in order to show the impact of 
education on recidivism. To accomplish this goal, a typology of the research is created to 
delineate the factor that is most promising in reducing recidivism, correctional education. 
Specifically, an analysis of 10 empirical studies is performed in order to understand 
the impact of correctional education programming on recidivism. Findings reveal 
conclusiveness about educational programming as a reduction tool for recidivism.
Introduction
The incarceration rates in America far exceed all other industrialized nations, with 
over two million inmates currently incarcerated (Brazell, Crayton, Mukamal, Solomon, &  

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
5
Lindahl, 2009; Vacca, 2004). Approximately, 95% of those inmates will be released 
yearly (Brazell et al., 2009). Overcrowding has become a major issue for correctional 
facilities and has created major problems for the criminal justice system and our 
nation (Petersilia, 2003). Further, research states that one in every one hundred 
persons in the United States is currently incarcerated (Brazell et al., 2009). Major 
studies (Batiuk, Lahm, McKeever, Wilcox, & Wilcox, 2005; Vacca, 2004; Gordon & 
Weldon, 2003; Steurer, Smith, & Tracy, 2001; Hull, Forrester, Brown, Jobe, & McCullen, 
2000; Stevens & Ward, 1997) have been conducted that work toward relieving 
the problem of overcrowding by looking at effective correctional programming, 
which reduces the likeliness for inmates to return to prison. These studies have all 
unanimously concluded that correctional education, particularly college or academic, 
has a negative correlation with recidivism (Steurer, Linton, Nally, &  
Lockwood, 2010; Brazell et al., 2009; Batiuk et al., 2005; Vacca, 2004; Gordon & 
Weldon, 2003; Steurer et al., 2001; Hull et al., 2000; Stevens & Ward, 1997).
Incarceration in America is a growing problem. As can be seen in Figure 1, 
prison populations, namely state and federal institutions, increased 55% from 
1995 to 2010. It is this growing population of inmates that creates the need 
for programming that closes the revolving door of correctional institutions 
in America. The most recent recidivism study conducted in 1994 by the 
Department of Justice reports a national recidivism rate of 68% (Langan & Levin, 
2002). This rate applies to prior offenders who were rearrested at three years 
post-release (Langan & Levin, 2002).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1995
2000
2005
2010
Per 100,000
Incarceration
Rates
Figure 1. Incarceration Rates in America, 1995– 2010
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoner Series Online (http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.
cfm?ty=pbse&sid=40).

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
6
A general consensus among scholars suggests that correctional education 
plays a major role in the rehabilitation of inmates (Steurer et al., 2001; Hull et al., 
2000; Batiuk et al., 2005; Vacca, 2004). There are various kinds of correctional 
programs aimed at providing rehabilitation to inmates (Steurer et al., 2010). 
Many researchers have discovered that correctional education often involves 
various programs, meaning that the variations of educational level among 
inmates has developed a need for many programs that serve the prospective 
inmates (Steurer et al., 2010). According to Steurer et al. (2010), education has 
three goals—to provide security, safety, and rehabilitation—and these goals are 
“the entire range of correctional services.” It is this similarity of goals that offers 
the most hope for the rehabilitation of inmates. The goals comparison, as stated 
by Steurer et al. (2010), work toward keeping society protected from offenders, 
insuring the security of institutions and aimed at creating functioning and 
productive members of society. Utilizing education as a means of accomplishing 
the goals of corrections allows for its use as a tool.
Petersilia (2003) states that societal forces, such as lawmakers and 
politicians, often combat the goals of correctional education by arguing that 
inmates should not be given access to education when society is obligated 
to pay for their education. This is often referred to as the “principle of least 
eligibility,” which suggests ambivalence among the public in providing inmates 
with specific programs that the general public is not granted freely (Petersilia, 
2003). It is this societal and political influence that greatly hinders correctional 
education as a rehabilitative tool for inmates (Petersilia, 2003). However, as 
policy makers call for less funding for rehabilitative programs it encourages 
increased spending for more prisons and longer prison sentences (Steurer  
et al., 2010; Brazell et al., 2009, Batiuk et al., 2005; Petersilia, 2003; Steurer et al., 
2001). Consequently, recidivism rates are climbing and more money is used 
to re-incarcerate these inmates (Steurer et al., 2010; Brazell et al., 2009, Batiuk 
et al., 2005; Petersilia, 2003; Steurer et al., 2001). According to Batiuk et al. 
(2005), in 1997 Ohio spent over $35 million on recidivating inmates at $47 per 
prisoner per day. Conversely, it has been reported that for every $962 spent on 
academic education for inmates the criminal justice system will save $5,306 per 
inmate (Brazell et al., 2009).
Previous research has shown that correctional education reduces recidivism, 
claiming gainful employment as the direct link to recidivism reduction (Steurer  
et al., 2010; Brazell et al., 2009; Batiuk et al., 2005; Gordon & Weldon, 2003; 
Steurer et al., 2001; Hull et al., 2000). However, various risk factors exist that 
impact recidivism. This study aims to explore the relationship of correctional 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
7
education and recidivism. To accomplish this, an examination of the risk factors of 
recidivism was performed, looking at education as a tool in reducing recidivism. 
Thus, a review of empirical studies analyzing correctional education programs 
and recidivism was conducted from 1995 to 2010. Using the information gained 
in this study as means, I propose some future goals of corrections.
Recidivism
Before delving into correctional education as a tool for recidivism reduction, it 
is important to discuss recidivism. Recidivism research is often a difficult topic 
to address. Researchers often debate the measures of recidivism in order to 
identify the indicators that offer the best predictors. A general consensus of 
literature identifies three measures of recidivism: re-arrest, re-conviction, and 
re-incarceration (Jancic, 1998). All the indicators alone offer several deleterious 
effects. Re-arrest, for example, often presumes guilt as well as assumes 
conviction and incarceration, yet this is not always the situation. According 
to Langan and Levin (2002), re-arrest is an incomplete measure for criminal 
activity because it assumes re-conviction. In a similar manner, re-conviction 
makes the supposition of re-incarceration, while other alternatives exist, 
such as probation. In a review of the literature, Chappell (2004) concluded 
that researchers typically define recidivism by three measures: re-arrest, re-
conviction, and re-incarceration; however, researchers operationalize recidivism 
as re-incarceration. Researchers often argue that re-incarceration offers the most 
effective indicator of recidivism. However, problematic still, literature suggests 
that re-incarceration alone fails to account for occurrences that do not result in 
incarceration, meaning a return to crime has still occurred yet not so much as 
to warrant incarceration. For example, occurrences that lead to re-conviction 
but result in probation help explain the difficulties of using re-incarceration as 
a measure. Independently, these three indicators create an ineffective measure 
of recidivism. Nevertheless, when all indicators are integrated, a more efficient 
measure of recidivism is created.
In addition to understanding how researchers define recidivism, it is also 
important to address the risk factors that influence recidivism or an offender’s 
propensity to recidivate. Research (Steurer et al., 2010; Brazell et al., 2009; 
Batiuk et al., 2005; Gordon & Weldon, 2003; Steurer et al., 2001; Hull et al., 
2000) suggests many risk factors influence recidivism, specifically race, age, 
gender, marital status, socioeconomic status (SES), educational attainment, 
and employment status. It is imperative that each risk factor be addressed 
independently, in order to comprehend its significance to recidivism research.

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
8
Age
Current literature has shown that the age of offenders has an impact on 
recidivism (Steurer et al., 2010; Brazell et al., 2009; Batiuk et al., 2005; Gordon 
& Weldon, 2003; Steurer et al., 2001; Hull et al., 2000). Often, age is identified 
as a risk factor of recidivism. The most recent statistics available on recidivism 
rates collected by the Bureau of Justice Statistics from prisoners released in 1994 
with a three-year follow-up was utilized in this study in order to show the risk 
factors of recidivism. According to Figure 2, as an offender ages the likelihood 
for that offender to return to crime at six months post-release reduces from 
38.6% to 25.9% among the 21–30 years of age group. As well, this reduction in 
recidivism can be noted for all indicators utilizing follow-up periods ranging from 
six months to three years.
Understanding influences of age on recidivism is useful for predicting who 
recidivates. However, age is only a risk factor for recidivism and is not useful as 
a tool for reduction in that age cannot be manipulated in the same manner that 
employment status and educational levels can be. Rather, the understanding 
of this risk factor is vital to the prevention and reduction of recidivism. Other 
influences exist, such as maturation, which works at explaining the effect of age 
on recidivism. With increases in age, people often develop more stability, which 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
21 to 30
31 to 40
41 and over
21 to 30
31 to 40
41 and over
21 to 30
31 to 40
41 and over
Re-Arrest
Re-Conviction
Re-Incarceration
Recidivism Rates
Recidivism Rates by Age Among All Indicator Categories
6 months
1 year
2 years
3 years
Figure 2.  Recidivism Rates by Age Groups, 1997*
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Recidivism Analysis Tool Online (http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/
index.cfm?ty=datool&surl=/recidivism/index.cfm#).
*Inmates released in 1994, with a 3-year follow-up period.

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
9
leads to a reduction in criminal activity or desistance. This maturation provides 
some explanation of the influence of age on recidivism.
Race
Race is also a risk factor of recidivism, and is useful in the prediction of 
recidivism. According to Coley and Barton (2006), among all racial categories, 
blacks have the highest rates of incarceration. In addition, the highest rates of 
recidivism among all racial categories can be seen among blacks. According 
to Figure 3, among all indicator categories, blacks have the highest rates of re-
arrest, re-conviction, and re-incarceration. Utilizing the Recidivism Analysis Tool 
from the Bureau of Justice Statistics, we see that among the re-arrest category, 
blacks have a recidivism rate of 77.6% at three years post-release compared to 
69.3% recidivism among whites. Research shows other structural and cultural 
factors exist that have created the increase in incarceration and recidivism 
among blacks. Specifically, policies that target specific races, such as the war 
on crime policies, reflect higher incarceration rates among black men than any 
other racial category (Pettit & Western, 2004). Understanding the role of race in 
the prediction of recidivism is necessary for defining a reduction tool.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
White
Black
Other†
White
Black
Other†
White
Black
Other†
Re-Arrest
Re-Conviction
Re-Incarceration
Recidivism Rates
Recidivism Rates by Race Among All Indicator Categories
6 months
1 year
2 years
3 years
Figure 3. Recidivism Rates by Racial Groups, 1997*
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Recidivism Analysis Tool Online (http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/
index.cfm?ty=datool&surl=/recidivism/index.cfm#).
*Inmates released in 1994, with a 3-year follow-up period.
†Other refers to offenders who identified themselves as non-white and non-black.

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
10
Gender
Gender is another important factor in recidivism prediction. A risk factor as well, 
literature suggests that women have the lowest recidivism rates. Further, males 
have higher rates of incarceration and higher rates of recidivism (Coley & Barton, 
2006). According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, it is shown that males have 
re-arrest rates at 50.6% versus female re-arrest rates at 42.9% at one year 
post-release. A comprehensive overview of the risk factors associated with 
recidivism is beneficial to determining what factors influence recidivism and how 
research should advance toward reduction tools. Importance is gained through 
an analytical understanding of recidivism risk factors in order to develop a high 
recidivism risk group for prediction purposes.
Marital Status
Research shows offenders who are married often have lower rates of recidivism 
than single offenders. In fact, literature states marital status as reducing 
crime and recidivism due to familial ties or bonds (Burton, Cullen, Evans, & 
Dunaway, 1994). According to Burton et al. (1994), these social bonds are a 
factor in reducing recidivism. Marital status as a factor of recidivism enables 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Re-Arrest
Re-Conviction
Re-Incarceration
Recidivism Rates
Recidivism Rates by Gender Among All Indicator Categories
6 months
1 year
2 years
3 years
Figure 4. Recidivism Rates by Gender Groups, 1997*
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Recidivism Analysis Tool Online (http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/
index.cfm?ty=datool&surl=/recidivism/index.cfm#).
*Inmates released in 1994, with a 3-year follow-up period.

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
11
researchers to understand that through increased stability crime can be reduced. 
Comprehending the impact of these risk factors on recidivism is necessary for 
effective programming that reduces recidivism.
Employment/Educational Attainment
Unemployment is often a common factor that impedes the offender, often 
contributing to the offender’s choice of criminality. As well, offenders who 
struggle with finding gainful employment are more prone to criminal activity 
than those who find higher paying jobs (Chamberlain, 2011). Additionally, one 
factor that contributes to offenders’ difficulty in finding gainful employment 
is level of education, specifically low levels (Chamberlain, 2011). According to 
Harlow (2003), of the national population of inmates, 41% have not completed 
a general equivalency diploma (GED) or high school, compared to 18% of 
the general population. Along with lower levels of education comes reduced 
employability of offenders (Chamberlain, 2011). Employment as a risk factor 
begins the shift toward the establishment of a tool for recidivism reduction. 
Further, decreased opportunity for employment creates a need for offenders 
to resort to illegitimate behavior to generate income (Burton et al., 1994). At 
this point the risk factor of educational level arises as a factor of recidivism. 
Educational attainment of offenders is often thought of as a risk factor of 
recidivism among researchers. However, the distinction between educational 
attainment and previously discussed risk factors (age, gender, race, marital 
status, and employment) emerges in our ability to utilize education as a tool for 
reduction. Structurally, these risk factors (age, gender, race, and marital status) 
for recidivism allow some avenue for change. However, to accomplish this goal, 
policies would have to be created that reduce the likelihood of these factors 
influencing recidivism. More directly, education as a tool for recidivism reduction 
offers a more viable path through policy changes.
Education as a Reduction Tool
Education as a recidivism reduction tool can provide many benefits for the 
United States as a whole (Erisman & Contardo, 2005). Initially, the offender 
gains the most benefit from obtaining a correctional education (Erisman & 
Contardo, 2005). However, over time the benefit is then shared with the family, 
the correctional institution, and society (Erisman & Contardo, 2005). This benefit 
refers to a reduction of costs associated with incarcerating offenders, a reduction 
of strain on the offenders and their families, and an economic boost for society 
(Erisman & Contardo, 2005). The opportunity for education of inmates offers a 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
12
link between employment and reduced recidivism (Gaes, 2008). Thus, an ­ 
in-depth look at correctional education and recidivism is necessary.
Many states in the United States offer correctional education programs 
to inmates during incarceration (Stevens & Ward, 1997). However, a study 
conducted by Erisman and Contardo (2005) revealed that about 5% of inmates 
enroll in correctional education programming. Correctional education has a 
variety of goals that are aimed at rehabilitating inmates (Gordon & Weldon, 
2003). These goals often include controlling inmate behavior, supporting the 
needs of the correctional institution, and providing inmates with basic skills 
and an opportunity to change (Gordon & Weldon, 2003). However, researchers 
have unanimously decided that the ultimate goal of correctional education is 
to reduce recidivism (Steurer et al., 2010; Brazell et al., 2009; Batiuk et al., 2005; 
Gordon & Weldon, 2003; Petersilia, 2003; Steurer et al., 2001; Hull et al., 2000; 
Stevens & Ward, 1997).
According to the literature, correctional education significantly reduces 
inmates’ likelihood of returning to prison (recidivism). Specifically, the level of 
education obtained while incarcerated and whether the inmate participated or 
completed education programming determines the rate of recidivism (Harlow, 
2003; Wilson, Gallagher, & MacKenzie, 2000). In a meta-analysis of 15 studies, 
researchers examined the correlation between participation and completion 
of post-secondary correctional education and recidivism (Chappell, 2004). It 
was shown that those inmates who completed a post-secondary correctional 
education program had lower rates of recidivism than did participants only 
(Chappell, 2004). The relationship between participation and completion of 
correctional education programs is important to the role of education as a tool 
for reduction of recidivism. Specifically, the importance of degree completion 
while incarcerated further aids in the reduction of recidivism rather than 
participation only.
Methods
This assessment of the association between correctional education 
programming and recidivism is based on empirical research studies published 
from 1995 to 2010. This date range was determined due to the lack of  
analysis of the research studies conducted for this time period. Further, the 
researcher utilized the publication date of all studies and realizes that most,  
if not all, of the research conducted was done on samples from the 1990s.  
In order to identify research articles, library database searches were completed 
using date limiting (1995–2010) and keyword search limiting terms. Multiple 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
13
combinations of search terms (recidivism, recidiv* and education, correctional 
education programming, prison education and recidiv*)1 focusing on the concept 
of the study were appropriated. Databases (ProQuest, JSTOR, and EBSCOhost) 
that are relevant to the discipline of sociology and criminology/criminal justice 
were utilized over the course of a three-year period (2010–2013) in order to 
identify new and relevant articles. Across all searches completed, hundreds of 
results were returned. Utilizing systematic content analysis, the researcher was 
able to narrow the sample size to 10 articles. Specifically, criteria were used 
to aid in this process. Two major criterions were used to eliminate research 
studies.
The first criterion for use was whether the article contained within it a 
primary empirical study looking at correctional education programming. For the 
purpose of this study, correctional education programming refers to a program 
that leads toward a diploma, certificate, or degree of any sort. This can include 
a high school diploma, a GED, vocational and technical training certificates, and 
college degrees. In many studies, elimination was problematic despite the fact 
that many empirical studies looking at correctional education programming 
have been conducted. The difficulty in elimination of studies that appeared 
suitable arose from the vast research on correctional education program 
evaluation and effectiveness.
The second criterion was whether or not the study used recidivism as 
an outcome measure. Specifically, the studies included must have measured 
individual recidivism of offenders while controlling for their participation 
in a correctional education program. Recidivism as an outcome measure 
can often be difficult to measure. Many studies exist that look at recidivism; 
however, only studies relating to correctional education programming 
that uses recidivism as an outcome measure were included in the study 
to assess the influence of correctional education programs on recidivism. 
Researchers often define recidivism as a “return to.” Customarily, recidivism 
is measured in three ways: re-arrest, re-conviction, and re-incarceration 
(Jancic, 1998; Chappell, 2004). Recently, researchers have included two 
other indicators of recidivism: self-reported offenses and violations of 
community supervision (Cecil, Drapkin, MacKenzie, & Hickman, 2000). For 
the purpose of this study, studies including any measure of recidivism were 
included.
1 *Refers to truncation used by the database in order to search for all possible references to 
recidivism, such as recidivism or recidivate.

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
14
Limitations
Some limitations exist in this study of correctional education and recidivism 
research that are beyond the control of the researcher. First, inclusion of 
only 10 studies available and appropriate for use in this review offered some 
dissatisfaction to the researcher. Initially, searches performed offered some 
satisfaction to the researcher due to vast amounts of results returned on 
correctional education and recidivism research. However, once the two criterions 
were applied, the sample size was reduced drastically. Second, another limitation 
that is beyond the control of the researcher is the lack of empirical research 
conducted from 2005 to 2010. Originally, the researcher allowed a date range of 
1995 to 2010; however, no empirical studies fitting the criteria were discovered 
since 2005. A vast array of knowledge can be derived from correctional 
education research, often program evaluation or effectiveness is measured.  
As stated earlier, only studies that use recidivism as an outcome measure  
were included in the sample.
Third, recidivism is difficult to measure and contains within it many problem 
areas. Criminological researchers debate the issue of recidivism measures 
frequently. Outcome measures utilized as indicators of recidivism are re-arrest, 
re-conviction, and re-incarceration. However, Jancic (1998) argues deleterious 
effects of the three indicators, as stated previously. Re-arrest is problematic 
because it presumes re-conviction and re-incarceration. The critical point arises 
due to the indicative nature of guilt offered by using re-arrest as an indicator. 
Further, re-conviction also proves presumptuous of re-incarceration. Finally,  
re-incarceration can be problematic to measure across jurisdictional lines, such 
as state to state and state to federal.
Analysis
The sample collected includes 10 studies that examine correctional education 
programs and recidivism. The purpose of this research is to create a 
comprehensive, although not exhaustive, review of the empirical studies 
conducted from 1995 to 2010 on correctional education and their findings on 
recidivism. What follows is a detailed account of the study carried out, looking 
at specific measures, sample size, levels of education, and the recidivism rates 
reported. Figure 5 shows the results of this study.
Steurer et al. (2001) conducted one of the largest studies ever that looked 
at correctional education and recidivism. Steurer et al. (2001) used a sample of 
3,170 inmates currently incarcerated and ready to be released between 1997 
and 1998 with a follow-up period of three years in order to effectively measure 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
15
Figure 5.  Studies Examining the Effect of Correctional Education Programs on Recidivism, 1995–2010
Author/Study
Sample 
Size (n =)
Independent Variable 
(Program Level)
Dependent 
Variable 
(Measure of 
Recidivism)
Controls
Findings
Stevens and 
Ward (1997)
60
Associate degree, 
Bachelor degree
Re-incarceration
Gender
95% of associate degree completers did not recidivate at  
3 years post-release
100% of bachelor degree completers did not recidivate at  
3 years post-release
Batiuk et al. 
(1997)
318
College, Employment
Re-incarceration
Nonparticipation
Post-release employment gained through correctional 
education reduces recidivism by 76% 
Hull et al. 
(2000)
3,000
Academic programs, 
Vocational programs, 
Employment
Re-incarceration
Gender, 
Nonparticipation
62% of academic participants did not recidivate
80% of academic completers did not recidivate
63% of vocational participants did not recidivate
79% of vocational completers did not recidivate
62% of participants were employed upon release
78% of completers were employed upon release
Kelso, Jr. 
(2000)
147
High school diploma, 
Vocational certificates, 
Associate degree
Re-incarceration
Nonparticipation
81% of high school completers had not recidivated at  
5 years post-release
88% of vocational certificate completers had not recidivated 
at 5 years post-release
91% of associate degree completers had not recidivated at  
5 years post-release
(continued  )

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
16
Figure 5    (Continued )
Author/Study
Sample 
Size (n =)
Independent Variable 
(Program Level)
Dependent 
Variable 
(Measure of 
Recidivism)
Controls
Findings
Kelso, Jr. 
(2000)
152
Vocational certificates, 
Associate degrees
Re-incarceration
Nonparticipation
91% of vocational certificate completers had not recidivated 
at 5 years post-release
85% of associate degree completers had not recidivated at  
5 years post-release
Burke and 
Vivian (2001)
64
College
Re-incarceration
Age, Educational 
level, Sentence 
length, Race, 
Nonparticipation
66% of college participants at 3 years post-release had not 
recidivated
22% of college participants at 5 years post-release had not 
recidivated
Steurer et al. 
(2001)
3,170
Education participation, 
Education completion, 
Employment
Re-arrest, Re-
conviction, Re-
incarceration
Nonparticipation, 
Age, Gender, Race, 
Living environment, 
Marital status, Prior 
criminal history, 
Type of offender
52% of participants had not been re-arrested at 3 years 
post-release
73% of participants had not been re-convicted at 3 years 
post-release
79% of participants had not been re-incarcerated at 3 years 
post-release
Brewster and 
Sharp (2002)
5,746
GED
Re-incarceration
Age, Race, Gender, 
Marital status
GED participation reduces recidivism

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
17
Gordon and 
Weldon 
(2003)
350
GED, Vocational training
Re-incarceration
Nonparticipation
8.75% of vocational training completers recidivated
6.71% of GED completers and participated in vocational 
training recidivated
26% of nonparticipants in correctional education recidivated
Nuttall 
(2003)
16,617
GED, Admitted with 
a degree, Admitted 
and released with no 
degree
Re-incarceration
Nonparticipation
68% of GED completers did not recidivate
67% of those who entered with a degree did not recidivate
63% of those who were admitted and released with no 
degree did not recidivate 
Batiuk et al. 
(2005)
972
High-school, GED, 
Vocational training, 
College
Re-incarceration
Nonparticipation, 
Age, Race, Type of 
offender
62% of college participants had not recidivated
Highest among high school participants
Some reduction among GED and vocational training 
participants
Drug offenders have lowest recidivism rates among other 
types of offenders

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
18
whether or not correctional education programs had any effect on recidivism. 
Like other researchers looking at correctional education and recidivism, Steurer 
et al. (2001) used a quasi-experimental design that focused on release cohorts. 
The researchers conducted a randomized sampling technique to extract 
inmates’ names that would be released during the study time frame from three 
states: Minnesota, Ohio, and Maryland (Steurer et al., 2001). This process was 
performed until each state had a sample size of 1,200 (n = 1,200) inmates. 
Oversampling was used in order to control for early releases. Of the sample 
drawn, 1,797 inmates had not participated in any correctional education, while 
1,373 inmates had participated in some form of correctional education. While 
the study has some issues with generalizability, no other study has gathered the 
amount of information Steurer et al. (2001) have, with over 500 variables that 
look at various factors that influence recidivism, as well as control for reliability 
and comparability.
The Three State Recidivism Study claims that the greatest hindrance to the 
validity of the study is similar to all other studies that have been conducted 
on inmates and correctional education programs, and that factor is the self-
selection bias (Steurer et al., 2010; Brazell et al., 2009; Batiuk et al., 2005; Vacca, 
2004; Gordon & Weldon, 2003; Steurer et al., 2001; Hull et al., 2000). Due to 
the nature of correctional programs, in that they are offered and not mandated, 
researchers are unable to conduct studies using truly random sampling 
techniques due to the voluntary participation or nonparticipation of inmates in 
these programs (Steurer et al., 2010; Batiuk et al, 2005; Steurer et al., 2001; Hull 
et al., 2000). The outcome measures that the researchers used were re-arrest, 
re-conviction, and re-incarceration (recidivism) (Steurer et al., 2001). This working 
definition of recidivism as an outcome measure contains limitations in that re-
arrest does not mean guilt and therefore could be misconstrued as recidivism if 
measured (Jancic, 1998). As well, using re-conviction as a measure of recidivism 
provides limitations in the research that imply re-incarceration, in which many 
cases do not result in incarceration (Jancic, 1998). Researchers often find it 
difficult to conclude on a working definition of recidivism. Esperian (2010) argues 
that recidivism is “a return to criminal behavior.” However, the problem with this 
definition is that it fails to take into account the “dark figure of crime” and only 
allows for the measure of crime that is actually reported (Jancic, 2004).
From the research conducted by Steurer et al. (2001), it can be concluded 
that those inmates who participated in some form of correctional education 
had higher rates of reduced recidivism than inmates who did not participate. 
For Maryland and Ohio, the greatest reduction in recidivism can be seen among 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
19
the re-incarceration rates from 37% to 31% (see Figure 5) and from 31% to 24% 
(Steurer et al., 2001), while Minnesota saw the greatest reduction in negative 
post-release behaviors (recidivism) among re-arrest with rates dropping from 
54% to 42% (Steurer et al., 2001). The researchers provide no differentiation 
between programs completed by inmates and the respective recidivism (Steurer 
et al., 2001). Therefore, it is hard to determine what educational level has the 
greatest impact on post-release behaviors. However, some interesting findings 
reported by Steurer et al. (2001) were that among the two groups (participants 
and nonparticipants), nonparticipants had completed higher levels of education 
prior to incarceration. This leaves questions as to what relationship exists 
between pre-incarceration education and during incarceration education on 
recidivism.
Other studies that sought to discover what relationship exists between type 
of correctional education and recidivism have been conducted. More specifically, 
Hull et al. (2000) looked at inmates who participated in academic and vocational 
education and those who did not (Hull et al., 2000). The researchers in this study 
also examined the effects of participation and completion of these academic 
and vocational programs on recidivism (Hull et al., 2000). This differentiation 
between participation and completion is an important finding in looking 
at correctional education and recidivism. In order to better understand the 
effects that correctional education has on recidivism it is imperative that we 
differentiate between participation and completion of correctional education. 
Hull et al. (2000) examined 3,000 inmates in the Virginia Department of 
Corrections between 1979 and 1994. Of those inmates, 1,307 inmates neither 
participated in nor completed any type of correctional education (Hull et al., 
2000). Hull et al. (2000) also examined the relationship between academic 
or vocational participators and academic or vocational completers, looking 
specifically at the influence on recidivism. Interestingly, the results show that 
completers, of either academic or vocational programs have lower rates of 
recidivism than those inmates who only participated in these programs but did 
not complete (Hull et al., 2000). In an examination of recidivism rates it becomes 
evident that inmates who complete either academic or vocational correctional 
education have lower recidivism rates than inmates who participate but do not 
complete academic or vocational correctional education (Hull et al., 2000). More 
specifically, inmates who participated in academic correctional education had 
recidivism rates of 38.2% versus 19.1% for inmates who completed academic 
correctional education programs (see Figure 5) (Hull et al., 2000). Among all 
groups examined by Hull et al. (2000), academic completers had the lowest 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
20
rates of recidivism. This distinction between completers and participators offers 
further understanding of the relationship between correctional education and 
recidivism.
In a study conducted by Gordon and Weldon (2003), researchers focused 
on exploring the relationship between type of program and recidivism. Gordon 
and Weldon (2003) examined 193 inmates in the Huttonsville Correctional 
Facility in West Virginia from 1999 to 2000. The researchers divided inmates 
into three groups: inmates who did not participate in any correctional education 
programs (control group), inmates who completed a general education 
equivalency (GED) and then participated in a vocational education program, and 
inmates who completed a vocational program (Gordon & Weldon, 2003). The 
rate of recidivism among the control group was 26% (Gordon & Weldon, 2003). 
However, those inmates who completed vocational education programs had a 
recidivism rate of 8.75% (see Figure 5) (Gordon & Weldon, 2003). This finding 
shows that there is a relationship between correctional education and recidivism 
and that relationship shows inmates who receive correctional education will 
have lower rates of recidivism than inmates who receive no correctional 
education (Gordon & Weldon, 2003). This finding is consistent with the study 
conducted by Steurer et al. (2001), as well as other studies (Steurer et al., 2010; 
Batiuk et al., 2005; Hull et al., 2000; Stevens & Ward, 1997).
It is also imperative to understand the type of programs that have a greater 
effect on recidivism. Batiuk et al. (2005) explored that relationship (type of 
program and recidivism). In the study, Batiuk et al. (2005) selected 972 (n = 972) 
inmates from the Ohio Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (ODCR) 
using a disproportionate stratified sampling technique in order to improve the 
representativeness of the sample to the population. The researchers divided the 
inmates into subgroups before using random sampling to extract the sample 
groups from each (Batiuk et al., 2005). The subgroups were those inmates who 
had participated in high school diploma/GED programs, vocational programs, 
and college education programs; as well as a control group of inmates who had 
not completed any correctional education programs (Batiuk et al., 2005). Once 
the inmates had been divided into their respective subgroups, random sampling 
procedures were used to create the sample (Batiuk et al., 2005). From the study 
(Batiuk et al., 2005), it was determined that inmates who participate in college 
education programs while incarcerated have lower rates of recidivism and the 
time to recidivism is longer than any other correctional education program 
rates, which can been seen in Figure 5. However, one limitation of the study, like 
previous studies, is the self-selection bias (Batiuk et al., 2005). Studies (Steurer  

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
21
et al., 2001; Hull et al., 2000; Batiuk et al., 2005; Vacca, 2004) suggest inmates 
who choose to participate in college correctional education have more self-
discipline and motivation than inmates who choose not to participate in 
correctional education programming. This factor has not been examined in the 
research and could influence the relationship between correctional education 
and recidivism (Batiuk et al., 2005).
In a previous study conducted a decade earlier, the same findings were 
revealed (Stevens & Ward, 1997). Stevens and Ward (1997) argue that inmates 
who receive a college degree while incarcerated will have lower recidivism 
rates, as seen in Figure 5. In a study conducted by Stevens and Ward (1997) 
of 60 inmates released in 1991 who had completed either a two-year or four-
year degree it was revealed that the level of education significantly affects 
recidivism. In fact, of the inmates who had received a four-year degree during 
incarceration, none had recidivated during the three-year follow-up period 
(Stevens & Ward, 1997). Similar findings have been discovered in other studies 
concluding that inmates who receive a two-year or four-year degree during 
incarceration have lower rates of recidivism (Stevens & Ward, 1997). Stevens 
and Ward (1997) also conducted a survey of states in order to examine the 
research on correctional education and recidivism. Only eight states returned 
the surveys sent by Stevens and Ward (1997), yet the findings all reflect  
that correctional education reduces recidivism. Those states were Texas,  
New York, Illinois, Alabama, Florida, Maryland, and Oklahoma (Stevens &  
Ward, 1997).
The survey from Alabama revealed that of the inmates who completed a 
post-secondary education degree while incarcerated, recidivism rates were at 
1% compared to the overall rate of 35% (Stevens & Ward, 1997). Stevens and 
Ward (1997) also determined from the Florida survey that inmates who received 
some form of correctional education were 19% more likely to find employment 
when released, arguing that employment reduces recidivism (Stevens & Ward, 
1997). The relationship between employment and recidivism is important in 
understanding what works in reducing recidivism. However, that research is 
beyond the scope of this article (see Saylor & Gaes 1997; Uggen 2000; Morash & 
Andersen 1978). Surveys conducted by Stevens and Ward (1997) from New York, 
Maryland, Texas, Alabama, Illinois, and Oklahoma all revealed that inmates who 
complete a college degree during incarceration have lower rates of recidivism 
than all other inmates.
Burke and Vivian (2001) examined inmates at the Hampden County 
Correctional Center (HCCC) in a comparison study of those who participated in 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
22
college education programs and those who did not. Recidivism was measured 
as re-incarceration, as adapted from the definition set forth by the HCCC. Using 
a sample size of 64 inmates (n = 64) the researchers gathered information 
from the jail management system in order to collect specific data on inmates to 
determine inclusion of inmates in the sample. Inclusion criteria included release 
dates of January to October 1993, serving a sentence of at least three months, 
and completion of at least three college credits or no college credits (Burke & 
Vivian, 2001). From the sample, two groups were created: inmates who had 
participated in college correctional education (treatment) and inmates who had 
not participated in college correctional education (control). The sample included 
32 inmates in each group. From the study, it was concluded that inmates who 
participate in college correctional education program have lower recidivism 
rates than inmates who do not participate in college education programs 
while incarcerated. Specifically, a 22% reduction, as seen in Figure 5, can be 
examined among the groups (Burke & Vivian, 2001). As well, it was observed 
that of those inmates who participate in college education programs, there is 
a longer length of time to recidivism than those who did not participate, with 
the average length reported at 4.38 years compared with 3.13 years (Burke & 
Vivian, 2001). Some limitations of the study are sample size and the limitation 
of one institution. Generally, researchers claim that sample sizes below 100 are 
often unreliable.
Brewster and Sharp (2002) addressed the problem of sample size by 
examining a sample of 11,813. In order to study the effect of obtaining a GED 
while incarcerated, looking at the impact it has on recidivism, Brewster and 
Sharp (2002) pooled data from the Oklahoma Department of Corrections. 
Initially, the sample of offenders released between January 1991 and December 
1994 contained 21,268 inmates. Through inclusion criteria the researchers were 
able to reduce the sample to a group of inmates, looking at the effects of GED 
on recidivism (n = 5,752). Recidivism data was gathered through January 1997, 
with a follow-up period of three years. Controlling for age, race, and marital 
status, the researchers report a reduction in recidivism among inmates who 
participated in GED programs while incarcerated in the Oklahoma Department 
of Corrections (Brewster & Sharp, 2002). This finding, as well as others, leads to a 
more thorough understanding of the impact of education on recidivism.
In a study conducted by Kelso, Jr. (2000), two correctional education centers 
were examined to determine the effect of educational level on recidivism. The 
Garrett Heyns Study gathered a sample of 147 inmates who had participated in 
high school, vocational training, or college programs before release between 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
23
1985 to 1987 (Kelso, Jr., 2000). The researcher reported at one year post-release 
there was a recidivism rate of 0% among those who had completed a high 
school diploma. Further, after five years post-release of inmates in the high 
school completion group, the recidivism rate average was 19.6% (Kelso, Jr., 
2000). For those inmates who received a vocational certificate, recidivism rates 
at five years post-release were reduced to 11.9%. More importantly, college 
degree recipients were reported to have recidivism rates, as seen in Figure 5, at 
just 10.8% at five years post-release (Kelso, Jr., 2000). In the second sample, the 
Twin Rivers Study contained 152 inmates who completed either a vocational 
certificate or associate degree program. Of those, the researcher reports a 
recidivism rate of 9% among inmates obtaining an associate’s degree while 
those obtaining a vocational certificate had a recidivism rate of 14% (Kelso, Jr., 
2000). Overall, inmates who participated in some form of correctional education 
programming at five years post-release had a lower recidivism rate compared 
with the 53.7% recidivism rate of the entire population (Kelso, Jr., 2000). 
Further, the results offer more evidence of the relationship between correctional 
education and recidivism. Additionally, the research continues to show reduction 
of recidivism through education as a tool.
Nuttall, Hollmen, and Staley (2003) performed a study of inmates at the 
New York State Department of Correctional Services (NYSDOCS) released in 
1996 with a three-year follow-up period. The inmates were divided into three 
groups: inmates who obtained a GED at NYSDOCS, inmates who were admitted 
and released without a degree, and inmates who entered with a degree, with 
a final sample size of 16,617. Of the three inmate groups, Figure 5 shows those 
who earned a GED while in the NYSDOCS had the lowest recidivism group at 
31.8% compared with those who did not obtain a degree at 36.6% (Nuttall et al., 
2003). Further, those who were admitted with a degree had a recidivism rate of 
32%. The results, like previously, provide support for the claims made by all the 
research examined in this study that as a tool correctional education, specifically 
college, works at reducing recidivism.
Additionally, Batiuk, Moke, and Rountree (1997) performed a 10-year 
follow-up study of 318 (n = 318) inmates in Ohio. Further, inmates released 
from 1982 to 1983 and followed through 1993 were included. The researchers 
measured recidivism as a return to prison and examined college participants 
and employment outcomes. From the study, the researchers report an overall 
recidivism rate of 37%. As well, the researchers discuss the effect of education 
on recidivism indirectly through the obtainment of employment rather than 
education as the sole factor. This provides support for further research on 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
24
employment, education, and recidivism of inmates. Figure 5 shows the results 
of the study conducted by Batiuk et al. (1997). Overall, Batiuk et al. (1997) claim 
education is a factor in the reduction of recidivism and increases the offender’s 
employability and likelihood of obtaining gainful employment.
From the extant research, it can be concluded that education works as a 
reduction tool for recidivism. More importantly, it is gathered that education has 
an indirect effect on recidivism reduction through increases in the employability 
of inmates. For a comprehensive overview of the sample (n = 10) of empirical 
research analyzed in this project, refer to Figure 5. From Figure 5, it becomes 
evident education as a tool for reduction is promising. Further, a discussion 
claiming the usefulness of education as a tool for reduction follows.
Policy Implications
Throughout the last 30 years, correctional education research has emerged 
that exhibits evidence of which correctional education reduces recidivism. 
Examination of a myriad of studies reveals conclusive results: correctional 
education reduces recidivism (Steurer et al., 2010; Brazell et al., 2009; Batiuk 
et al., 2005; Vacca, 2004; Gordon & Weldon, 2003; Steurer et al., 2001; 
Hull et al., 2000; Stevens & Ward, 1997). Further, research that investigates 
previous studies in order to reexamine the findings reveals identical results 
(Gaes, 2008; Chappell, 2004; Wilson et al., 2000; Bouffard, MacKenzie, & 
Hickman, 2000). The research findings from the extant research conclude 
that all forms of correctional education reduces recidivism; more specifically, 
college education during incarceration has the greatest impact on recidivism. 
The issue at hand is concerned with a review of the research on correctional 
education and the impact on recidivism, particularly the overall findings of 
empirical research.
Understanding the relationship between correctional programs, specifically 
education programs, and recidivism is important for learning tools to reduction. 
The extant research provides insight as to which educational programs aid in 
reducing recidivism. As well, it also provides a research base for which other studies 
can be developed to help fill the gaps. This project systematically reviewed the 
empirical research that examined the correlation between correctional education 
programs, looking at the factors’ influence on recidivism. It was concluded that 
inmates who obtain a correctional education degree while incarcerated will have 
lower rates of recidivism. The research that has been conducted brings forth 
questions as to what else can be done to aid in the reduction of recidivism utilizing 
education as a tool. The research explains the relationship between correctional 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
25
education and recidivism; specifically, if we educate prisoners, recidivism will be 
reduced. With this knowledge of education as a tool for recidivism reduction there 
leaves the question of where we go from here.
It is evident that education is a tool which administrators and educators 
alike can utilize in the reduction of recidivism. Education as a correctional 
practice has been around for over 200 years (Crayton & Neusteter, 2008). It 
is recognized as one of the first programs in the rehabilitation of inmates and 
continually produces reduction of recidivism through employability of inmates 
(Crayton & Neusteter, 2008).
The major consensus among the research concludes that correctional 
education reduces recidivism (Steurer et al., 2001; Hull et al., 2000; Batiuk 
et al., 2005; Vacca, 2004; Stevens & Ward, 1997). As well, higher levels of 
education, such as two year and four-year degrees further decrease recidivism 
of inmates (Batiuk et al., 2005; Hull et al, 2000; Stevens & Ward, 1997). It has 
been concluded specifically that post-secondary correctional education offers 
the greatest reduction in recidivism than any other correctional education 
program (Batiuk et al., 2005; Hull et al., 2000; Stevens & Ward, 1997). However, 
administrators and policy makers have failed to understand this finding and 
continue to support the elimination of funding for inmates. This elimination 
of funding virtually ended correctional college education programs in many 
states (Batiuk et al., 2005). When policy makers haphazardly enact policies that 
contradict the findings in research, they are essentially setting offenders up for 
failure and those affected by these polices (families, institutions, society, etc.). 
Policy makers need to re-evaluate current policies that have eliminated funding 
for inmates to receive college education in order to reduce recidivism.
Where we go from here
This discussion of correctional education’s impact on recidivism leads to the 
question: where do we go from here? The implications of this study reveal the 
need of funding for correctional education programs for inmates. However, 
political practices have continually sought to eliminate funding despite these 
findings. According to Latessa (2004), political change is a difficult topic to 
address; specifically, the idea of why political will continually seeks to eliminate 
funding for correctional education. One claim is that politicians seek avenues of 
little risk taking and with correctional education the risk is high (Latessa, 2004). 
Research affirms this claim due to the lack of methodologically sound empirical 
studies on correctional education and recidivism. Specifically, empirical studies 
that have been conducted all contain within them methodological limitations 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
26
due to a lack of controls for risk factors of recidivism. Of the 10 studies used 
in this project, none of them controlled for all the risk factors of recidivism 
(age, race, gender, marital status, employment, and educational attainment). 
Rather, few to little controls were used in the studies. As well, other factors 
not addressed were motivation and discipline of inmates in their decision to 
participate in correctional education programs.
In order to influence political changes, research needs to be 
methodologically sound. One solution to a methodologically sound study of 
correctional education and recidivism research would include controls for all the 
risk factors of recidivism. By controlling for age, race, and gender, the researcher 
can eliminate the influence of structural inequalities that exist in the occurrences 
of crime. Using controls for marital status, the influence of the strength of social 
bonds or familial ties is reduced as well. Further, by controlling for employment 
the researcher can establish whether or not strain was a factor in crime 
commission. Without controlling for the risk factors of recidivism, causation 
cannot be established. Thus, our research base is left with simply a correlation 
between correctional education and recidivism.
Additionally, determining an appropriate measure of recidivism is a key 
factor in developing a sound methodology for recidivism research. Many 
measures of recidivism have been indicated in the research, such as re-arrest, 
re-conviction, and re-incarceration. However, as discussed previously, these 
measures are often problematic in that, when measured independently, they 
fail to account for some criminal activity. One solution is to first determine 
an adequate definition of recidivism. Many researchers agree that recidivism 
can be defined as a “return to” (Brazell, 2009; Chappell, 2004). Utilizing this 
definition and applying it to the criminal justice policy of “innocent until 
proven guilty,” researchers can develop an appropriate measure of recidivism. 
For example, conviction is commonly the indicator of guilt in the U.S. criminal 
justice system. Therefore, re-conviction would be the most suitable measure of 
recidivism in that it captures (compared to the other indicators) the most crime.
Accomplishing the task of creating a methodologically sound research study 
of correctional education and recidivism is one step toward changing the political 
policies that have eliminated funding. However, the influence of empirical 
research on political changes still contains issues. First, public opinion greatly 
influences political will and the trajectory with which policies flow. The task of 
changing public opinion is insurmountable, especially due to the lack of influence 
of empirical research on the views of the public. For example, despite the large 
body of research that exists regarding the hazards of smoking, some portions 

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
27
of the population still continue this behavior. Policy changes appear to have 
the greatest impact on public behaviors, such as nonsmoking policies, when 
advocates begin to vocalize their support or nonsupport of specific interests.
There is little doubt that the politics of correctional education has 
influenced the lack of funding for programs. In 1994, President Clinton signed 
into law the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act (VCCLEA), which 
was monumental in the elimination of funding for inmates to participate in 
correctional education. Shortly after, many education programs were closed 
by states lacking financial support of these programs (Brazell, 2009). At the 
same time, the VCCLEA allowed funding to be allocated to other criminal 
justice departments. The continual shifting of funds from department to 
department is an example of the politics at work in the funding of correctional 
education programs. However, the haphazardness of political fluctuations 
creates many detrimental results. The issue of funding in any arena is certainly 
a political game. In the area of corrections, the issue is heightened due to the 
perceived population that benefits from increased funding.
This certainly raises the question of who benefits from increased funding 
for correctional education. Initially, the offender receives the most benefit for 
increased education. This benefit is then shared with the offenders’ family 
through increased contributions. The benefit continues to influence society 
through economic boosts and through reduced costs of re-incarceration. 
Essentially, everyone benefits from correctional education. Through this logic, 
therefore, increased funding for correctional education benefits everyone.
As shown, research for correctional education and the impact on recidivism 
is still needed. Emphasis on research that is methodologically sound is 
important in order to influence public policy to increase funding for correctional 
education. From the research base, it can be determined that correctional 
education reduces recidivism through increased employability. It is important for 
researchers to explore the role of employment on recidivism. More importantly, 
understanding the relationship between correctional employment programs 
and recidivism is needed. A call for more research on correctional programs, 
education and employment, and their impact on recidivism is imperative.
References
Batiuk, M., Lahm, K., McKeever, M., Wilcox, N., & Wilcox, P. (2005). Disentangling the effects 
of correctional education: Are current policies misguided? An event history analysis. 
Criminal Justice, 5(1), 55–74.
Batiuk, M., Moke, P., & Rountree, P. (1997). Crime and rehabilitation: Correctional education 
as an agent of change—a research note. Justice Quarterly, 167–180.

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Correctional Education and Recidivism
Lori L. Hall
28
Bouffard, J., MacKenzie, D., & Hickman, L. (2000). Effectiveness of vocational education 
and employment programs for adult offenders: A methodology-based analysis of the 
literature. Journal of Offender Rehabilitation, 1–41.
Brazell, D., Crayton, A., Mukamal, D., Solomon, A., & Lindahl, N. (2009). From the classroom 
to the community: Exploring the role of education during incarceration and reentry. 
Urban Institute: Justice Policy Center, 1–50.
Brewster, D., & Sharp, S. (2002). Educational programs and recidivism in Oklahoma: 
Another look. The Prison Journal, 314–334.
Burke, L., & Vivian, J. (2001). The effect of college programming on recidivism rates at the 
Hampden County House of Correction: A 5-year study. Journal of Correctional Education, 
160–162.
Burton Jr., V., Cullen, F., Evans, T., & Dunaway, R. (1994). Reconsidering strain theory: 
Operationalization, rival theories, and adult criminality. Journal of Quantitative 
Criminology, 213–239.
Cecil, D., Drapkin, D., MacKenzie, D., & Hickman, L. (2000). The effectiveness of adult basic 
education and life-skills programs in reducing recidivism: A review and assessment of 
the research. Journal of Correctional Education, 207–226.
Chamberlain, A. (2012). Offender rehabilitation: Examining changes in inmate treatment 
characteristics, program participation, and institutional behavior. Justice Quarterly, 
183–228.
Chappell, C. (2004). Post-secondary correctional education and recidivism: A meta-analysis 
of research conducted 1990–1999. Journal of Correctional Education, 55(2), 148–169.
Coley, R., & Barton, P. (2006). Locked up and locked out: An educational perspective on the U.S. 
prison population. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Services.
Crayton, A., & Neusteter, S. (2008). The state of correctional education. Unpublished 
manuscript, John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Erisman, W., & Contardo, J. (2005). Learning to reduce recidivism: A 50-state analysis of post-secondary 
correctional education policy. Washington, D C: Institute for Higher Education Policy.
Esperian, J. (2010). The effect of prison education programs on recidivism. Journal of 
Correctional Education, 61(4), 316–334.
Gaes, G. (2008). The impact of prison education programs on post-release outcomes. 
Unpublished manuscript, University of California-Irvine.
Gordon, H., & Weldon, B. (2003). The impact of career and technical education programs 
on adult offenders: Learning behind bars. Journal of Correctional Education, 54(4), 
200–209.
Harlow, C., U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs. (2003). Education and 
correctional populations. Washington DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Hull, K., Forrester, S., Brown, J., Jobe, D., & McCullen, C. (2000). Analysis of recidivism rates 
for participants of the academic/vocational/transition education programs offered by 
the Virginia Department of Correctional Education. Journal of Correctional Education, 
51(2), 256–261.

The Journal of Correctional Education 66(2) • May 2015
Lori L. Hall
Correctional Education and Recidivism
29
Jancic, M. (1998). Does correctional education have an effect on recidivism? Journal of 
Correctional Education, 49(4), 152–161.
Kelso Jr., C. (2000). Recidivism rates for two education programs’ graduates compared to 
overall Washington state rates. Journal of Correctional Education, 233–236.
Langan, P., & Levin, D. (2002). Recidivism of prisoners released in 1994. Washington DC: 
Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Latessa, E. (2004). The challenge of change: Correctional programs and evidence-based 
practices. Criminology and Public Policy, 547–560.
Morash, M., & Anderson, E. (1978). Liberal thinking on rehabilitation: A workable solution to 
crime. Social Problems, 25, 556–563.
Nuttall, J., Hollmen, L., & Staley, E. (2003). The effect of earning a GED on recidivism rates. 
Journal of Correctional Education, 90–94.
Petersilia, J. 2003. When prisoners come home: Parole and prisoner reentry. New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press.
Pettit, B., & Western, B. (2004). Mass imprisonment and the life course: Race and class 
inequality in U.S. incarceration. American Sociological Review, 69(2), 151–169.
Saylor, W., & Gaes, G. (1997). Training inmates through industrial work participation and 
vocational and apprenticeship instruction. Corrections Management Quarterly, 1(2), 
32–43.
Steurer, S., Linton, J., Nally, J., & Lockwood, S. (2010). The top-nine reasons to increase 
correctional education programs. Corrections Today, 40–43.
Steurer, S., Smith, L., & Tracy, A. (2001). OCE/CEA three state recidivism study. Correctional 
Education Association, 1–65.
Stevens, D., & Ward, C. (1997). College education and recidivism: Educating criminals is 
meritorious. Journal of Correctional Education, 48(3), 106–111.
Uggen, C. (2000). Work as a turning point in the life course of criminals: A duration model 
of age, employment and recidivism. American Sociological Review, 67, 529–546.
Vacca, J. (2004). Educated prisoners are less likely to return to prison. Journal of Correctional 
Education, 55(4), 297–305.
Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, H.R. 3355, 103rd Congress. (1994).
Wilson, D., Gallagher, C., & MacKenzie, D. (2000). A meta-analysis of corrections-based 
education, vocation, and work programs for adult offenders. Journal of Research in 
Crime and Delinquency, 347–368.
Biographical Sketch  
Lori L. Hall is a doctoral student in the Virginia Tech Department of Sociology. Originally 
from Arkansas, she obtained her MA in criminal justice from Arkansas State University.  
This manuscript was completed as a requirement for that degree.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without
permission.
View publication stats

