Does incarceration-based drug treatment reduce
recidivism? A meta-analytic synthesis of the research
Ojmarrh Mitchell & David B. Wilson &
Doris L. MacKenzie
Published online: 28 September 2007
# Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2007
Abstract This research synthesized results from 66 published and unpublished
evaluations of incarceration-based drug treatment programs using meta-analysis.
Incarceration-based drug treatment programs fell into five types: therapeutic
communities (TCs), residential substance abuse treatment (RSAT), group counsel-
ing, boot camps specifically for drug offenders, and narcotic maintenance programs.
We examined the effectiveness of each of these types of interventions in reducing
post-release offending and drug use, and we also examined whether differences in
research findings can be explained by variations in methodology, sample, or program
features. Our results consistently found support for the effectiveness of TC programs
on both outcome measures, and this finding was robust to variations in method,
sample, and program features. We also found support for the effectiveness of RSAT
and group counseling programs in reducing re-offending, but these programs’ effects
on drug use were ambiguous. A limited number of evaluations assessed narcotic
maintenance or boot camp programs; however, the existing evaluations found mixed
support for maintenance programs and no support for boot camps.
Keywords Corrections . Drug offenders . Drug treatment . Meta-analysis . Offenders
While there is clear evidence that a substantial proportion of incarcerated offenders
are drug dependent, the effectiveness of common incarceration-based drug abuse
J Exp Criminol (2007) 3:353–375
DOI 10.1007/s11292-007-9040-2
Studies included in this meta-analysis are indicated with an asterisk
O. Mitchell (*)
Division of Criminal Justice, University of Cincinnati, 600 Dyer Hall, PO Box 210389, Cincinnati,
OH 45221-0389, USA
e-mail: ojmarrh.mitchell@uc.edu
D. B. Wilson
Administration of Justice, George Mason University, Manassas, VA, USA
e-mail: dwilsonb@gmu.edu
D. L. MacKenzie
Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
e-mail: dmackenzie@crim.umd.edu

programs in reducing recidivism is ambiguous. In the United States of America,
research suggests that between 40% and 45% of inmates are drug dependent. For
example, a 2002 study of US jail inmates found that nearly half (45%) were
substance dependent and another 23% reported substance abuse symptoms (Karberg
and James 2005). Similarly, findings from the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring
(ADAM) program revealed that the median rate of drug dependence among
incarcerated arrestees in 39 US cities was 39% (Zhang 2003). High levels of drug
dependence also have been found in samples from England and Canada. For
example, a study of incarcerated arrestees in five English cities found that 45% of
inmates were drug dependent at one point in their lives and 33% were drug
dependent at the time of interview (Bennett 1998). Likewise, a sample of Canadian
federal prisoners found that the rate of drug dependence was between 31% and 43%
(Pernaen et al. 2002).
In the absence of effective abuse treatment, it is likely that a high proportion of
these drug-dependent offenders will re-offend. Research consistently indicates that
drug-using probationers/parolees recidivate at higher rates than do non-drug users
(see e.g., Bureau of Justice Statistics 1995; Gendreau et al. 1996; Horney et al. 1995;
MacKenzie et al. 1999). Thus, the period of incarceration is a potentially critical
opportunity to intervene in this cycle of drug use and crime. However, the two most
common types of drug abuse interventions in US prisons and jails, self-help 12-step
and drug education programs, have not been demonstrated to reduce recidivism, in
existing reviews of the literature (Pearson and Lipton 1999; Lipton et al. 1992).
In recognition of the potential of incarceration-based drug treatment, the
limitations of existing programs, and the rising need for effective substance abuse
interventions, US Congress created the Residential Substance Abuse Treatment
(RSAT) Program under the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of
1994 [Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) 2005]. This program provides financial
assistance to local and state correctional facilities to develop and implement
incarceration-based drug treatment programs. Between fiscal years 1996 and 2003,
more than $400 million have been provided to the states under this program; and as
of July 2004, 300 RSAT programs were in operation (BJA 2005).
This tremendous investment in incarceration-based drug treatment programs and
their proliferation present a host of important questions that need to be addressed,
such as: Are incarceration-based drug treatment programs effective in reducing
recidivism? Does the existing body of research indicate that participation in RSAT-
funded programs reduces recidivism? Are there particular types of drug treatment
that are especially effective or ineffective? Approximately how effective are these
programs? What characteristics differentiate effective programs from ineffective
programs? This research attempts to answer these questions by synthesizing existing
evaluations of incarceration-based drug treatment programs using systematic,
quantitative review techniques.
Common incarceration-based drug treatment programs and their effectiveness
Many correctional interventions could be interpreted as “incarceration-based drug
treatment.” We defined incarceration-based drug treatment programs as interventions
354
O. Mitchell, et al.

that were specifically targeted at substance abusers, intended to reduce future
substance abuse and other criminal behaviors, and were based in a prison, jail, or
analogous facility for juvenile offenders. Given this definition, program evaluations
fell into five types: (1) therapeutic community (TC) programs, (2) RSAT-funded
programs (most of which were based on the TC model), (3) group counseling
programs, (4) boot camps for drug offenders, and (5) narcotic maintenance
programs.
TCs are the most intensive of all incarceration-based drug treatment programs.
While the components of TCs vary, there are several common components. TCs
house participants in a distinct treatment unit away from the anti-social influences of
the general correctional environment to create an atmosphere focused on
rehabilitation and reformation. Another core component of the TC model is that
participants are instrumentally involved in running the TC; for example, participants
lead treatment sessions, monitor other residents for rule compliance, maintain the
treatment unit, and resolve disputes. TCs have a confrontational nature in which both
staff and participants openly challenge anti-social behaviors and attitudes; yet,
participants also are supportive of each others’ struggles to make pro-social
reformations. Many TCs share a philosophy that sees drug abuse as symptomatic
of a broader personality disorder, and, consequently, many TCs focus on the larger
disorder and not just drug abuse, per se (Kooyman 1993). Further, not only are TCs
intense in nature but they are also long in duration—typically lasting at least 6
months but usually around 12 months.
RSAT-funded programs share several components with the TC model. Like TC
programs, RSAT-funded programs usually separate program participants from the
general population; they tend to be intensive and have a long duration (6 to 12
months for prison-based programs, or at least 3 months for jail-based programs).
Within these parameters, local corrections agencies control the content of such
programs. Our review of the extant literature reveals that most of the RSAT-funded
programs are based on the TC model. Thus, in this review, RSAT-funded programs
are essentially TCs, but not all TCs are RSAT-funded programs.
Counseling programs use various combinations of drug education, self-help 12-
step programming, life skills training, and cognitive and behavioral skills training.
The key commonality among these programs is their reliance on group-based
counseling approaches, in which substance abuse and other common problems are
discussed among peers in an effort to solve these problems. Typically, counseling
programs are multi-faceted, including several of the above-mentioned components;
however, some counseling programs heavily emphasize one of these components.
And still other counseling programs include both group and individual counseling.
Boot camps are modeled after military basic training. Inmates participate in
rigorous exercise regimens, learn military drill and ceremony, wear uniforms, and
take on challenge courses (timed obstacle courses). Boot camps are highly
structured. From the moment residents wake in the morning until lights out they
are constantly engaged in scheduled activities. Boots camps also involve
considerable confrontation, but, unlike TC programs, confrontations most often
occur between correctional staff and inmates—with drill instructors disciplining any
deviation from established codes of conduct. Boot camp proponents claim that the
harsh nature of boot camps serves as a deterrent to future criminal conduct, and the
Incarceration-based drug treatment
355

content of these programs instills self-discipline, which also leads to reduced
recidivism (Wilson and MacKenzie, 2006).
Narcotic maintenance programs [i.e., methadone and levo-alpha-acetyl-methadol
(LAAM) maintenance] are pharmacological approaches. These programs attempt to
reduce the harms associated with opiate dependency (e.g., disease transmission,
criminal activity) by prescribing synthetic opioid medication. Unlike heroin and
other strong opiates, these medications do not produce a euphoric high; instead,
methadone and LAAM block the euphoric high produced by opiate use and suppress
opiate withdrawal symptoms. Incarceration-based narcotic maintenance programs
link released inmates to community-based programs for continued care. The success
of incarceration-based maintenance programs appears to be heavily dependent on
their ability to place released offenders into community-based programs.
Each of the above types of drug interventions has the potential to reduce drug use
and other criminal behaviors. However, existing systematic reviews of this body of
research have found that only participation in TC programs was consistently
associated with reductions in recidivism. In particular, Pearson and Lipton (1999)
systematically reviewed experimental and quasi-experimental research assessing the
effectiveness of corrections-based drug abuse programs in reducing recidivism
conducted in any country and completed between 1968 and 1996, inclusive. Their
search revealed 30 studies meeting their eligibility criteria. These authors found that
six of the seven TC evaluations indicated that participants exhibited lower recidivism
than non-participants; the overall mean weighted r effect size was 0.133 (p=0.025).
By contrast, the mean effect size was not statistically significant and near zero for
both boot camp and group counseling programs. Although Pearson and Lipton’s
review found too few studies of methadone maintenance, drug education, cognitive-
behavioral, and 12-step programs to draw strong conclusions, it characterized the
existing evidence of these programs’ effectiveness as being promising.
In many regards, this systematic review is an extension of the work by Pearson
and Lipton. Like that earlier work, this synthesis systematically and comprehen-
sively reviews the effects of incarceration-based drug interventions on post-treatment
drug use and other types of criminal behaviors, using meta-analytic procedures. The
primary difference between their work and the current systematic review is that this
research project uses a more current time frame (1980 through 2004). We believe
that this difference is salient for two reasons: (1) more recent evaluations of drug
treatment interventions may be more generalizable to current correctional practices;
and, (2) numerous evaluations of incarceration-based drug treatment programs have
been conducted since 1996, particularly evaluations of RSAT programs.
Method
Eligibility criteria
The scope of this review was published or unpublished experimental and quasi-
experimental evaluations of incarceration-based drug treatment programs for juveniles
and adults that utilized a comparison group. The eligibility criteria for this review were
that: (1) the evaluation assessed an intervention that was administered in a correctional
356
O. Mitchell, et al.

facility; (2) the intervention specifically targeted substance users; (3) the evaluation
used an experimental or two-group quasi-experimental research design that included a
no-treatment or minimal treatment comparison group; (4) the evaluation reported a
post-release outcome measuring offending or drug use; (5) the intervention was
conducted between 1980 and 2004, inclusive; and, (6) the evaluation had to report
enough information for us to calculate an effect size.
Regarding the first eligibility criterion, our operational definition of “correctional
facilities” included only jails and prisons, and analogous facilities for juveniles.
Interventions conducted at half-way houses or community-based residential facilities
were not included. It is worth noting that this criterion excluded a small number of
notable evaluations. Specifically, programs designed to be alternatives to incarcer-
ation, such as those reported in Dynia and Sung (2000) and Knight and Hiller
(1997), were excluded by this criterion.
The second criterion restricted the focus of this review to evaluations that
specifically targeted drug users. Therapeutic interventions conducted in correctional
facilities that were generally available to offenders regardless of an offender’s drug
history were not included. For instance, Shaw and MacKenzie (1992) evaluated the
effects of a boot camp program on a sub-sample of drug-using offenders; however,
this evaluation was excluded because the boot camp program was not specifically
targeted at drug users. By contrast, Zhang (2000) evaluated a boot camp program
specifically geared towards drug users—this evaluation was included in this review.
This criterion was necessary, because this review is concerned with incarceration-
based drug treatment; without this criterion, the present review would become a
review of incarcerated-based treatment comprised of drug users.
The third criterion specified that all included evaluations must have a comparison/
control group that received no treatment or minimal treatment. Thus, we excluded
quasi-experiments that involved comparisons of two or more interventions that were
roughly comparable or whose comparability in terms of effectiveness in reducing
recidivism was in dispute (i.e., treatment–treatment comparisons or dose–response
evaluations). For example, the comparison group in the study by Swartz et al. (1996)
was constructed by dividing program participants into four groups based upon length
of program participation. Evaluations utilizing such comparison groups were not
included in this systematic review. Furthermore, we did not include evaluations in
which the comparison group was comprised predominantly or solely of dropouts
from the intervention of interest. For instance, evaluations such as those by Field
(1985, 1989) and Berggren and Svard (1990) that used program drop-outs as the
comparison group were excluded from this systematic review.
The fourth and fifth criteria are largely self-explanatory. We chose to exclude
studies conducted before 1980, because we questioned the generalizability of
findings from such studies to current correctional contexts. It is important to
emphasize, however, that all evaluations needed to report a post-release measure of
recidivism. This criterion excluded a few notable evaluations, such as those by
Shewan et al. (1996) and Dolan et al. (2003), which reported in-prison outcomes.
The last criterion excluded evaluations that did not report enough information for
us to calculate an effect size. This criterion was necessary for practical purposes.
Unfortunately, a handful of otherwise eligible evaluations (e.g., those by Schippers
et al. 1998; Guerin 2002) were ruled ineligible on the basis of this last criterion.
Incarceration-based drug treatment
357

Search strategy
The goal of the search strategy was to identify all studies, published or unpublished,
that met the above eligibility criteria. The search began by our conducting a
computerized keyword search of bibliographic databases. In particular, we
conducted a search of the following databases: PsychLit, MedLine, NCJRS,
Criminal Justice Abstracts, Dissertation Abstracts, Sociological Abstracts, Social
Science Citation Index, SocioFile, Conference Papers Index, UnCover, C2 SPECTR,
and CINAHL, as well as Google internet searches. The keywords used were: drug
treatment, substance abuse treatment, drug counseling, therapeutic community(ies),
methadone maintenance, boot camp(s), offenders, residential substance abuse
treatment, RSAT, inmates, incarceration, incarcerated, prison, evaluation, outcome
evaluation, and recidivism. These keywords were used in various combinations.
We also searched for eligible evaluations by carefully reading existing reviews of
unfamiliar research. In particular, we reviewed the reference lists of existing
syntheses to identify potentially eligible evaluations. Likewise, many of the eligible
studies reviewed the work of similar studies; these studies were also assessed for
eligibility. Additionally, we reviewed the Digest of Research on Drug Use and HIV/
AIDS in Prisons (Flanagan et al. 2004), which abstracts much of the “grey”
literature, particularly European grey research.
Further, we searched websites of several prominent research organizations.
Specifically, we searched for relevant research reports on the following websites:
Correctional Service Canada’s research publications page; the Home Office; RAND
Drug Policy Research Center; The Urban Institute’s crime/justice research page; and,
Vera Institute of Justice’s publications page.
Finally, we hand-searched the titles/abstracts of articles published between 1999
and 2004 in the following journals: Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment,
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, Journal
of Drug Issues, The Prison Journal, Crime & Delinquency, and Journal of Offender
Rehabilitation. We chose to hand-search these journals because they have a strong
track record of publishing relevant studies, and many of these journals were not
indexed well by the computerized databases we utilized.
All studies that could not be ruled ineligible, based on a preliminary review of the
title and abstract, were retrieved. That is, we reviewed each title/abstract looking for
clear evidence that the study violated one or more of the eligibility criteria. For
example, the first eligibility criterion was that all studies evaluated an intervention
administered in a correctional facility; thus, if a title/abstract clearly indicated that
the study assessed a program that was not administered in a correctional facility, then
the study was not retrieved for further scrutiny. We read closely the retrieved studies
to determine final eligibility status.
It is important to note that the unit of analysis in this meta-analysis is the
evaluation—a contrast between one treatment group and one comparison group. We
distinguish studies, documents reporting the results of an evaluation or evaluations,
from evaluations, specific contrasts between a treatment and comparison group. This
distinction is necessary, as several studies reported the results of more than one
evaluation; that is, evaluations were nested within studies.
358
O. Mitchell, et al.

Coding of effect sizes and moderator variables
The coding forms employed in this review were structured hierarchically, so that we
could recognize explicitly the nested nature of evaluations within studies. Any
number of effect sizes could be coded from each evaluation using these forms.
Further, the coding forms captured key features of the nature of the treatment,
research sample, research methodology, outcome measures, and direction and
magnitude of observed effects.
We coded at least one effect size from each evaluation. We utilized the odds ratio
effect size for dichotomous outcomes, as this type of effect size is the most appropriate
for such outcomes (Lipsey and Wilson 2001). Indicators of criminal behavior based on
non-dichotomous scales were coded using the standardized mean difference effect
size. Effect sizes were coded in a manner such that positive effect sizes indicated that
the treatment group had a more favorable outcome than the comparison group did
(i.e., less re-offending or drug use). Odds ratio and standardized mean difference
effect sizes were combined using the method developed by Hasselblad and Hedges
(1995). Specifically, mean difference effect sizes were transformed onto the odds ratio
effect size scale (see also Sánchez-Meca et al. 2003).
It is important to note that many authors in this body of research report their
findings by contrasting participants who completed the treatment (“graduates”),
participants who failed to complete the treatment (“failures”), and the comparison
group. Findings reported in this manner clearly open the door for selection bias, and,
thus, such findings are difficult to interpret (i.e., was the observed reduction in
recidivism due to the treatment or selection bias). Whenever we encountered results
reported in this fashion, we re-calculated recidivism rates for the treatment group by
combining graduates with failures. We then compared this overall treatment group to
the comparison group. We believed that this practice would reduce the likelihood
that selection bias would influence the results of this meta-analysis.
Our analyses of these effect sizes utilized the statistical approach outlined by
Lipsey and Wilson (2001) and Cooper and Hedges (1994). In particular, we used the
inverse variance method and assumed that the true treatment effects varied as a
function of both measured (i.e., coded features of each evaluation) and unmeasured
differences between evaluations. This analytic approach required statistical inde-
pendence of effect sizes. Several types of statistical dependencies were evident in the
coded evaluations. First, it was common for evaluators to measure and analyze more
than one indicator of criminal behavior (e.g., re-arrest, re-conviction, drug use) or
analyze the same indicator of criminal behavior at multiple post-program follow-ups
(e.g., 6 months, 12 months). Second, it was also common for authors to report
findings from the same sample of research participants in multiple studies.
We employed several procedures to attain statistical independence. As a first-step,
all evaluations were cross-checked against one another to ensure that each evaluation
was included no more than once in each data set. Next, we created two data sets, one for
drug use outcomes and another for re-offending outcomes. Some evaluations reported
more than one measure of drug use or re-offending:, instead of simply averaging these
multiple measures, we selected particular outcomes of interest to maximize com-
parability of outcomes. In particular, for re-offending measures, we selected effect sizes
Incarceration-based drug treatment
359

that were: (1) general (i.e., covered all offense types as opposed to being offense
specific), (2) based on re-arrests, (3) dichotomous, and (4) followed sample members
for 12 months. We decided to select such effect sizes because this type of outcome
measure was the most commonly reported outcome measure. For evaluations that did
not report such an outcome, we coded the available outcome that most closely
resembled this preferred outcome measure. Thus, the re-offending data set primarily
contained outcome measures concerning re-arrest rates in the first 12-months after
release. Similarly, for the drug use data set, we selected effect sizes that were:
(1) general (i.e., concerning any illicit drug use), (2) dichotomous, and, (3) followed
sample members for 12 months. Consequently, the drug relapse data set primarily
contained outcomes concerning drug relapse in the first 12 months after release.
Results
Description of eligible studies and evaluations
Our search strategy uncovered 233 potentially eligible studies. We were able to obtain
copies of 229 of these studies. Of the retrieved studies, 53 unique studies met our
eligibility criteria. These 53 unique studies reported the results of 66 independent
evaluations, as several studies contained multiple evaluations. Of these evaluations, 58
had been conducted in the United States of America, three had been conducted in
Australia, three had been conducted in Canada, one had been conducted in the UK, and
one evaluation had been conducted in Taiwan. Approximately half of the evaluations
(32) were coded from studies published as journal articles or book chapters, and the
other 34 evaluations were coded from unpublished technical reports and government
documents. In regards to date of publication, two-thirds of the evaluations were coded
from studies made available after 1996—the latest date eligible for inclusion in Pearson
and Lipton’s (1999) review; thus, the vast majority of the evaluations included in the
current research were not included in the earlier review.
The bulk of the evaluations assessed either TC or counseling programs. of the 66
evaluations, 30 examined the effectiveness of TC programs, and another 25
evaluations were of counseling programs. Relatively few of the evaluations were
of narcotic maintenance programs or boot camp programs designed for drug
offenders: five and two evaluations, respectively. And primary type of treatment
modality could not be reliably coded for four evaluations.
Mean odds ratio for re-offending and drug use outcomes
Of the 66 evaluations, 65 reported at least one re-offending outcome measure. One
odds ratio was an outlier in the negative direction; this odds ratio was “Winsorized”
to the 5th percentile.1 Approximately 83% of the 65 odds ratios for offending
1 The outlier came from an evaluation of a narcotics maintenance program (Magura et al. 1993, female
sample). The logged odds ratio for this contrast was -4.61, indicating that the comparison group had a
lower rate of post-release offending than the treatment group did. No other logged odds ratio had an
absolute value of 2 or more. Alternative analyses that excluded this outlier yielded substantively similar
results.
360
O. Mitchell, et al.

indicated that the treatment group re-offended less than the comparison group did.
The random-effects mean odds ratio was 1.37, with a 95% confidence interval (CI)
of 1.24 to 1.51. This finding indicates that, in general, participation in incarceration-
based drug treatment programs was associated with a reduction in post-release
offending. A more intuitive sense of this effect size can be gained by translating this
effect size into percentages. As a matter of convenience, we assumed a 50% rate of
re-offending for the comparison group. Given this assumption, the overall means
odds ratio translates into a 42% re-offending rate for the treatment group.2 The
distribution of the odds ratios for offending exhibited considerably more variability
than expected by sampling error alone (Q=551.84, df=64, p<0.001). This finding
suggested that features of the treatment programs, research methodology, and/or
characteristics of the sample might be systematically related to effect size.
Subsequent analyses tested this possibility.
Examination of the effect for drug use produced a slightly smaller overall mean
effect size that was not statistically significant. The random-effects mean odds ratio
for the 20 evaluations on drug use outcomes was 1.28 (95% CI of 0.92-1.78), and
there was more variability than expected by sampling error alone (Q=197.97 df=19,
p<0.001). Thus, with respect to drug relapse, the evidence suggests great variability
in effects across evaluations, and, overall, we cannot conclude that these programs
are effective in reducing post-release drug use, although the evidence is positive.
Moreover, the finding of great variability in effects suggests that there may be
program or method features that are associated with drug relapse effects; for
example, perhaps participation in programs with long treatment durations do, in fact,
facilitate post-release reductions in drug use.
Moderator analyses
The above analyses indicated that the effect size distributions displayed more
variability than expected by chance alone. This finding suggested that there may be
important differences in research methodology, sample, and/or interventions that
may account for some of this variability in effect size. We tried to capture important
differences between evaluations by coding information from each evaluation. These
moderator analyses, however, were confronted with three major issues. First, our
ability to code many relevant features was limited by the quality of the descriptions
provided by the primary authors. Second, the moderator analyses had limited
statistical power. Post-hoc power analyses revealed that the power to detect a small
effect (i.e., a difference in logged odds ratio of 0.20) in these moderator analyses
ranged from approximately 0.10 to 0.40. This limited statistical power means that
only contrasts with large effects were likely to be statistically significant. To combat
this issue, we interpreted as statistically significant any contrast that had a
probability of occurring by chance alone of less than 10% (i.e., p<0.10), and,
instead of relying solely on statistical significance, we discussed substantively
significant effects. We defined “substantively significant” relationships based on the
2 Alternatively, we assumed a 35% re-offending rate for the comparison group, which was the average 12-
month re-offending rate. This effect size suggested a 28% rate of re-offending for the treatment group.
Incarceration-based drug treatment
361

magnitude of the difference between categories in terms of the logged odds ratio.
Specifically, if a moderator variable’s categories differed by a logged odds ratio of
0.20 or more, and each category had a least five evaluations, then we considered
such differences as substantively significant. Similarly, if one category of a
moderator had fewer than five evaluations, and the difference between categories
was 0.40 or more, then we considered such differences as substantively significant.
Third, all of the moderator analyses were essentially bivariate. Unfortunately, the
limited number of available effect sizes, and the sparseness of the data sets utilized,
made multivariate data analysis highly problematic, and the results of such analyses
were very sensitive to small alternations (e.g., excluding one observation). As a
result, these bivariate findings were vulnerable to spuriousness. Given these
challenges, the following moderator analyses are offered as suggestive.
The first moderator variable examined was primary type of intervention. Table 1
displays the random-effects mean odds ratio effect size for each type of treatment
program for re-offending and drug use outcomes. Analysis of these means indicated
that treatment effectiveness on both types of outcome measures varied considerably
by primary type of intervention (re-offending: Q=6.36 with df=3, p=0.09. This
analysis excludes the “ambiguous” category, drug use: Q=4.29 with df=2, p=0.12).
The mean odds ratio for TC programs on re-offending outcomes was 1.38, with a
95% CI of 1.17 to 1.62. As this CI did not include 1.00, this mean odds ratio is
statistically significant at the 0.05 level. Similarly, the mean odds ratio for the 12
evaluations of TC programs on drug use outcomes was 1.41 (95% CI 0.95-2.05, p<
0.10). These findings indicated that TC participants generally had statistically lower
rates of re-offending and drug use after release from incarceration than did non-
participants.
Ten of the TC evaluations were RSAT-funded programs (not shown in Table 1).
These ten evaluations yielded a mean odds ratio of 1.39 (95% CI 1.10–1.76) for the
re-offending outcomes. Only four of the ten RSAT evaluations assessed a drug use
outcome; two of these evaluations indicated that participants in RSAT-funded
programs had lower drug use rates than non-participants, and the other two
evaluations found just the opposite. Not surprisingly, given these conflicting results,
the overall mean odds ratio from these four evaluations was 1.02 (95% CI 0.48–
2.15), which indicates no difference. Thus, the existing evidence indicated that
RSAT-funded programs were associated with statistically significant reductions in re-
Table 1 Odds ratio by type of treatment and type of outcome
Offending
Drug use
Type of program
Mean ES
95% CI
ka
Mean ES
95% CI
k
TC
1.38*
1.17–1.62
30
1.41#
0.95–2.09
12
Counseling
1.50*
1.25–1.79
25
0.78
0.35–1.73
3
Narcotic maintenance
0.84
0.54–1.29
5
1.95
0.87–4.40
4
Boot camp
1.10
0.62–1.96
2
0.56
0.15–2.06
1
Ambiguous
1.59
0.98–2.58
3
−−
−−
−
a Number of odds ratios
*p<0.05
# p<0.10
362
O. Mitchell, et al.

offending, but the limited available evidence was decidedly mixed in regards to drug
use outcomes.
Likewise, evaluations of counseling programs indicated that these programs were
associated with statistically significant reductions in re-offending but that these
programs’ effects on drug use were ambiguous. In particular, the 25 evaluations of
counseling programs exhibited the largest mean odds ratio on re-offending outcomes
(1.50, 95% CI 1.25–1.79). Once again, the available evidence is scant in regards to
drug use, with only three evaluations reporting drug use outcomes. Two of the three
effect sizes were greater than, 1 indicating that program participants had less post-
release drug use; however, one effect size was substantially less than 1. Combined,
these three odds ratios yielded a mean odds ratio of 0.77 (95% CI 0.35–1.67).
A particularly small number of evaluations assessed the effectiveness of
incarceration-based narcotic maintenance or boot camp programs for drug offenders.
The handful of extant evaluations of narcotic maintenance programs indicated that
participation in maintenance programs was associated with substantially significant
reductions in drug use but not re-offending. All four of the odds ratios for drug use
outcomes indicated that participation in narcotic maintenance programs produced
lower post-release drug use than not-participating; this random-effect mean is
substantively large, 1.94, but it was not statistically significant (p=0.11). By
contrast, three of the four odds ratios for offending indicated that participants were
more likely to re-offend than were non-participants. The two available evaluations of
boot camps indicated that these programs were not associated with statistically
significant reductions in either re-offending or drug use. Both of the evaluations
measuring re-offending outcomes found that boot camp participants had slightly
lower rates of re-offending than non-participants did (i.e., both evaluations had
logged odds ratios less than 0.14).
As further evidence of the importance of primary type of treatment, we found that
the association between odds ratio and several moderator variables depended on
whether the odds ratio came from the evaluation of a TC or of a counseling program.
Therefore, we conducted separate moderator analyses for TC and counseling
programs in a series of parallel analyses. The odds ratios concerning boot camp,
narcotic maintenance, and ambiguous programs were set aside for these analyses.
Table 2 examines variation in the odds ratios for offending by coded
methodological features. One of the most important findings from Table 2 is that
the vast majority of the mean odds ratios were statistically significant, which
suggests that the finding that TC participants had lower rates of re-offending than did
non-participants was largely robust to methodological variations. The first moderator
variable, “overall method quality,” was a four-point ordinal measure of the internal
validity of each evaluation. This four-point categorization was similar to the
University of Maryland’s Scientific Methods Scale (see Farrington et al. 2006). The
lowest level of method quality was “weak quasi-experimental designs.” These
studies utilized a comparison that lacked comparability to the treatment group before
the intervention. The next level of method quality, “standard quasi-experiment,” was
assigned to evaluations characterized by research designs that used a comparison
group that was slightly different from the treatment group on important observed
variables before the intervention. “Rigorous quasi-experiments” were characterized
as evaluations involving treatment and comparison groups that were highly
Incarceration-based drug treatment
363

comparable in important observed variables (e.g., age, gender, prior criminal history,
prior drug use) or as evaluations that employed slightly different treatment and
comparison groups but also used multivariate analyses that controlled for pre-
existing differences in important variables. The highest level of method quality,
“experimental designs,” randomly assigned research participants to conditions and
did not have attrition problems.3
Most of the available evaluations were methodologically weak. Of the 30 TC
evaluations, 63% were rated as weak quasi-experiments (20%) or as standard quasi-
experiments (43%). Nine evaluations (30%) were rated as rigorous quasi-experiments,
and two (7%) were rated as experimental designs. Thus, in absolute terms, this body of
research was rated as methodologically weak; yet, in relative terms, these evaluations
were comparable in methodological rigor to other criminal justice research. In
particular, Weisburd et al. (2001) rated the methodological rigor of a sample of 308
evaluations of criminal justice interventions using a scale very similar to the one used
in our research. Those authors reported that 73% of evaluations were either weak
(level 2) or standard (level 3) quasi-experiments and that 24% were either rigorous
Table 2 Odds ratio for offending, by methodological features: therapeutic communities
Coded feature
Mean ES
95% CI
ka
Overall method quality+
Weak quasi-experiment
1.03
0.79–1.35
6
Standard quasi-experiment
1.40*
1.17–1.69
13
Rigorous quasi-experiment
1.39*
1.09–1.77
9
Experimental design
1.90*
1.22–2.97
2
Type of comparison group†
Randomly assigned
1.90*
1.25–2.88
2
Eligible but not referred to treatment
1.40*
1.20–1.65
17
Eligible but declined treatment
0.79
0.54–1.16
2
Historical comparison group
1.00
0.67–1.50
2
Offenders from other jurisdiction/facility
1.20
0.74–1.93
2
Combination of the above
1.54*
1.16–2.05
5
Overall attrition apparent
No
1.31*
1.12–1.54
23
Yes
1.48*
1.01–2.16
5
Differential attrition apparent
No
1.37*
1.17–1.61
23
Yes
1.31
0.85–2.01
4
Published†
No
1.16#
1.00–1.36
18
Yes
1.69*
1.39–2.05
12
a Number of odds ratios
*p<0.05
# p<0.10
† Difference between means is statistically significant at p<0.05
+ Difference between means is statistically significant at p<0.10
3 We coded two types of attrition problems: total and differential. Total attrition problems were defined as
overall attrition of 20% or greater, or if the primary authors indicated that attriters differed substantially
from non-attriters. Differential attrition problems were defined similarly; that is, differential attrition of
20% or greater, or if the primary authors indicated that attrition substantially reduced the comparability of
the treatment and comparison group.
364
O. Mitchell, et al.

quasi-experiments (level 4) or randomized experiments (level 5); in comparison, the
corresponding percentages for our research were 63% and 37%.
A common concern when one is dealing with a body of research that is generally
methodologically weak is that this research may systematically overestimate
treatment effects. In other words, perhaps methodologically weak evaluations are
more likely to find treatment effects than are more rigorous evaluations. The research
of Weisburd et al. (2001) research found precisely this pattern of results. Our
synthesis of TC evaluations, however, reveals a different pattern of results. Table 2
indicates that the mean odds ratios for the three highest levels of method quality
were all statistically significant, indicating that the effectiveness of TC programs was
not confined to only methodologically weak evaluations. Further, the methodolog-
ical quality variable was statistically associated with effect size; all of the three
higher levels of rigor had mean effect sizes that were statistically larger than the
lowest level of rigor, and evaluations with the highest level of rigor differed
statistically from the three lower levels. Thus, evaluations with the highest level of
rigor produced the largest treatment effects.
Two additional methodological factors, type of comparison group and publication
status, had a statistically significant relationship to effect size. Evaluations that
formed the comparison group via random assignment had the largest odds ratios,
whereas, evaluations that utilized individuals who declined to participate in TC
treatment had the lowest odds ratios. Post-hoc analyses indicated that evaluations
composed of decliners had statistically smaller odds ratios than did the other
comparison groups, and evaluations that utilized comparison groups formed by
randomization had a larger mean odds ratio than did either evaluations that utilized a
comparison group of decliners, or offenders from other jurisdictions/facilities. This
set of findings, once again, suggests that evidence of the effectiveness of TC
programs is not confined to methodologically suspect evaluations (i.e., evaluations
that utilized comparison group composed of decliners or offenders from other
jurisdictions/facilities or time periods).
Another methodological characteristic that had a statistically significant associ-
ation with effect size was publication status. Specifically, evaluations coded from
published studies exhibited statistically larger effect sizes than evaluations from
unpublished studies. This finding is an indication of publication bias in evaluations
of TC programs. As a further test for the presence of publication bias in these
evaluations, we conducted specialized statistical tests for publication bias.
Specifically, we conducted both the Begg and Mazumdar (1994) and the Egger et
al. (1997) tests for publication bias. The more statistically powerful Egger et al.
method found evidence of publication bias. Given this finding, we conducted Duvall
and Tweedie’s (2000) “trim and fill” method for accounting for publication bias.
This procedure added seven effect sizes to the distribution, which lowered the mean
random effects odds ratio to 1.21, with a 95% CI of 1.08 to 1.36 (Q=252.90, df=36,
p<0.001); this publication bias-adjusted mean odds ratio translates into a re-
offending rate of approximately 45% for the treatment group, if we continue to make
the convenient assumption that 50% of the comparison group re-offends.
Table 3 presents the results of a similar bivariate analysis between the odds ratios
for re-offending and sample/treatment characteristics for the odds ratio from
evaluations of TC programs. Three sample characteristic were coded: age group
Incarceration-based drug treatment
365

(juvenile or adult), gender composition of sample, and type of offender (non-violent
or a mixture of violent and non-violent offenders). Five treatment characteristics
were coded: the presence of a mandatory aftercare component, treatment location
(prison or jail), length of treatment (more than 90 days or fewer than 90 days), nature
of participation (strictly voluntary vs at least some non-voluntary participation), and
program maturity. These analyses found that none of the coded sample or treatment
characteristics displayed a statistically or substantively significant relationship with
effect size. Perhaps the most striking finding from Table 3 is that nearly all of the
mean odds ratios were statistically significant, which suggests that evidence of the
effectiveness of TC programs is largely robust to sample and program variations.
Stated differently, participation in TC programs were associated with lower rates of
re-offending, regardless of the age group, gender composition, offender type, use of
coercion to compel participation, and several other factors.
A parallel set of analyses was conducted for counseling programs (Tables 4 and 5).
Once more, most evaluations were methodologically weak. Nearly three-quarters
(72%) of evaluations were rated as either “weak” or “standard” quasi-experiments,
which again is fairly typical of criminal justice research, as revealed by Weisburd et
Table 3 Odds ratios for offending, by sample/treatment features: therapeutic communities
Coded feature
Mean ES
95% CI
ka
Age group of sample
Adults
1.37*
1.18–1.60
27
Juveniles
1.47
0.89–2.43
2
Gender composition of sample
All female
1.65*
1.14–2.39
6
Mixed (male and female)
1.23
0.84–1.79
4
All male
1.36*
1.13–1.64
18
Offender type
Non-violent offenders
1.49*
1.24–1.79
15
Mixed (violent and non-violent)
1.28*
1.02–1.62
9
Mandatory aftercare
No
1.31*
1.07–1.59
14
Yes
1.51*
1.16–1.95
9
Treatment location
Prison
1.35*
1.16–1.56
27
Jail
1.56#
0.94–2.60
3
Length of treatment
90 days or more
1.45*
1.26–1.68
22
Fewer than 90 days
1.15
0.79–1.67
3
Strictly voluntary treatment
No
1.32*
1.08–1.61
8
Yes
1.57*
1.35–1.84
16
Program maturity
New program (less than 1 year)
1.34*
1.10–1.64
14
Developing program (1–3 years)
1.18
0.79–1.77
4
Established program (3+ years)
1.45*
1.15–1.83
11
a Number of odds ratios
*p<0.05
# p<0.10
366
O. Mitchell, et al.

al. (2001). This lack of methodological rigor was particularly problematic, as
evaluations rated higher on this scale exhibited non-statistically significant mean
odds ratios. In particular, evaluations rated as “rigorous” quasi-experiments or
“experimental designs” exhibited mean effect sizes of 1.33 (95% CI 0.86–2.06) and
1.09 (95% CI 0.52–2.30), respectively, neither of which was statistically significant.
While the statistical test comparing the mean odds ratios for the various levels of
methodological rigor was not statistically significant, substantively, this finding
suggests that the strongest evidence of the effectiveness of counseling programs in
reducing re-offending came from methodologically weak evaluations—a finding that
parallels that of Weisburd et al. (2001). The only methodological variable that had a
statistically significant association with the magnitude of the odds ratios was
differential attrition. Evaluations that had more than 20% differential overall attrition
had a mean odds ratio that was statistically less than those without differential
attrition problems.
The moderator distinguishing published from unpublished studies found no
difference in the magnitude of the effect for counseling programs. This finding
comports with specialized tests for publication bias (i.e., the Begg and Mazumdar,
and Egger et al. publication bias tests). These findings converged in concluding that
there was no evidence of publication bias among evaluations of counseling
programs.
In regards to coded sample features, two of the three moderator variables were
statistically related to effect size (Table 5). Evaluations of samples of adults had a
Table 4 Odds-ratios for offending , by methodological features: counseling programs
Coded feature
Mean ES
95% CI
ka
Overall method quality
Weak quasi-experiment
1.82*
1.24–2.66
8
Standard quasi-experiment
1.49*
1.08–2.06
10
Rigorous quasi-experiment
1.33
0.86–2.06
5
Experimental design
1.09
0.52–2.30
2
Type of comparison group
Randomly assigned
1.09
0.51–2.32
2
Eligible but not referred for treatment
1.63*
1.21–2.20
11
Historical comparison group
1.32
0.81–2.16
5
Offenders from other jurisdiction/facility
1.54
0.83–2.86
3
Combination of the above
1.30
0.62–2.70
2
Overall attrition apparent
No
1.63*
1.28–2.07
18
Yes
1.15
0.77–2.22
6
Differential attrition apparent†
No
1.68*
1.37–2.05
20
Yes
0.71
0.43–1.16
3
Published
No
1.51*
1.07–2.18
9
Yes
1.49*
1.15–1.94
16
a Number of odds-ratios
* p<0.05
† Difference between means is statistically significant at p<0.05.
Incarceration-based drug treatment
367

statistically larger mean odds ratio than evaluations that used samples of juvenile.
The gender composition moderator was also statistically related to odds ratio. In
particular, evaluations that were composed solely of female offenders had a larger
mean odds ratio than evaluations of samples of men or of mixed genders; in fact,
post-hoc contrasts indicated that all three mean odds ratios statistically differed from
one another.
In addition to the moderator variables coded from evaluations of TC programs,
for the evaluations of counseling programs we also coded primary emphasis of each
program. Unfortunately, many evaluations were not described in detail by the
primary authors, and, as a consequence, our ability to code program variation was
limited. We were able to categorize 17 of the 25 programs evaluated into three types:
cognitive behavioral therapy, 12-step programming/drug education, and multifaceted
(i.e., programs that combined the above approaches without a clearly discernible
Table 5 Odds-ratios for offending, by sample and treatment features: counseling programs
Coded feature
Mean ES
95% CI
ka
Age group of sample†
Adults
1.53*
1.41–1.67
19
Juveniles
1.16
0.92–1.46
3
Gender composition of sample†
All female
2.94*
1.74–4.97
3
Mixed (male and female)
1.01
0.69–1.48
6
All male
1.67*
1.26–2.21
11
Offender type
Non–violent offenders
1.48*
1.18–1.86
11
Mixed (violent and non-violent)
1.26#
0.98–1.62
12
Primary emphasis of counseling†
Cognitive behavioral therapy
1.12
0.74–1.68
5
12-step/drug education
1.54*
1.00–2.36
5
Multifaceted counseling
1.21
0.85–1.72
7
Unknown emphasis
2.14*
1.54–2.97
8
Mandatory aftercare
No
1.45*
1.14–1.85
20
Yes
1.82*
1.10–3.03
4
Treatment location
Prison
1.56*
1.20–2.04
16
Jail
1.42#
1.00–2.01
9
Length of treatment
90 days or more
1.44#
0.98–2.12
10
Fewer than 90 days
1.58*
1.12–2.23
11
Strictly voluntary treatment+
No
1.07
0.60–1.92
4
Yes
1.75*
1.26–2.44
14
Program maturity
New program (less than 1 year)
1.08
0.82–1.41
8
Developing program (1–3 years)
1.43
0.70–2.92
2
Established program (3+ years)
1.79*
1.36–2.37
9
a Number of odds-ratios
* p<0.05
# p<0.10
† Difference between means is statistically significant at p<0.05.
+ Difference between means is statistically significant at p<0.10.
368
O. Mitchell, et al.

primary emphasis); the remaining eight evaluations did not supply enough
information to be reliably classified and are listed as “Unknown emphasis” in Table 5.
The evaluations classified into the unknown emphasis category exhibited the largest
mean odds ratio (2.14, with 95% CI of 1.54–2.97), whereas, evaluations of
multifaceted programs yielded the smallest mean odds ratio (1.21, with 95% CI of
0.85–1.72). Post-hoc contrasts indicated that the evaluations in the unknown
emphasis category had statistically larger mean odds ratio than did either evaluations
of cognitive behavioral therapy or multifaceted counseling; none of the other
categories differed statistically from one another. Thus, the strongest evidence of the
effectiveness of counseling programs comes from evaluations without a clear
depiction of the treatment provided to program participants. Interestingly, the
evidence suggests that the most popular incarceration-based drug treatment modality,
12-step/drug education, exhibited a substantively and statistically significant mean
odds ratio of 1.54 (95% CI 1.00–2.36).
One other treatment characteristic was related to odds ratio. Evaluations of
programs that were strictly voluntary had a statistically larger mean odds ratio than
did other evaluations of counseling programs. In fact, evaluations in which at least
some program participants did not volunteer for treatment produced a mean odds
ratio (1.07) that did not differ statistically or substantively from 1.00, which suggests
that in such evaluations program participants and non-participants had similar rates
of re-offending.
Discussion
In concordance with the authors of existing reviews (e.g., Wilson et al. 2005;
Pearson and Lipton 1999), we found no evidence that participation in boot camp
programs reduced post-release offending or drug use. While the number of existing
evaluations of boot camp programs for drug offenders was very small, given the
consistency of our findings to other research on boot camps, it appears unlikely that
boot camp programs generally reduce recidivism.
The evidence concerning the effectiveness of narcotic maintenance programs was
mixed. We found no evidence of the effectiveness of such programs in reducing re-
offending; in fact, program participants had somewhat higher re-offending rates than
non-participants in four out of the five evaluations. By contrast, all existing
evaluations found somewhat lower rates of post-release drug use among participants
than non-participants, and the random-effects mean odds ratio for these four
evaluations was substantively large (1.95). Thus, incarceration-based narcotic
maintenance programs may reduce drug use, but the scant existing evidence does
not indicate that such program reduce re-offending. Our ability to draw firm
conclusions in this area of research, however, is undermined by the limited statistical
power of our analyses. Continued research investigating the effectiveness of these
programs would be a significant contribution to the knowledge base.
The most consistent evidence of treatment effectiveness came from evaluations of
TC programs. These programs consistently showed post-release reductions in re-
offending and drug relapse. This finding was robust to methodological variation. In
fact, even among the most rigorous evaluations, participation in TC programs was
Incarceration-based drug treatment
369

consistently related to reductions in re-offending. We also found that TCs were
effective in several different types of samples, which suggests that TCs can be
applied to a wide-range of offenders. However, there was evidence of publication
bias in this area of research, and this bias appeared to cause the effectiveness of TC
programs to be over-estimated. This possibility tempers our findings.
Ten of the 30 evaluations of TC programs were evaluations of RSAT-funded
programs. These ten evaluations found evidence of effectiveness of RSAT programs
in reducing re-offending. Four of these evaluations assessed the impact of the RSAT
programs’ effectiveness on drug use. This limited evidence produced mixed results:
two evaluations found that participants had lower post-release rates of drug use, and
two evaluations found that participants had higher post-release rates of drug use,
than did non-participants. Thus, such evaluations are as likely to find reductions in
drug use as they are to find increases.
Similarly, the evidence regarding counseling programs indicated that these
programs were effective in reducing re-offending, but, once again, the limited
evidence available on these programs’ effects on drug use was unclear. The analyses
of odds ratios from evaluations of counseling programs revealed that, while
counseling programs had a larger mean odds ratio than evaluations of TC programs
on offending outcomes, the positive effects of counseling programs were more
contingent. Evidence of the effectiveness of counseling programs was strongest in
evaluations that were rated as methodologically weak, composed of adult offenders,
and strictly voluntary. Regrettably, counseling interventions generally were poorly
described by the primary authors, and, as a result, we were unable to code precise
program features that may have distinguished the most effective programs.
Interestingly, evaluations of both TC and counseling programs found that
treatment was somewhat more effective in samples of women than in samples of
either men or mixed genders. This finding is particularly interesting, as incarcerated
female offenders are disproportionately drug involved, and female offenders
traditionally have had limited access to high-quality treatment programs (see e.g.,
Pollock 2004).
A surprising finding was the smaller effects of both TC and counseling programs
on drug-relapse measures than on measures of re-offending. A presumption of these
programs is that their effectiveness in reducing re-offending is mediating by
reductions in drug use. As such, we would expect drug-relapse effects to be as large
as, or larger than, re-offending effects. An analysis of the relationship between drug
relapse odds ratios and re-offending odds ratios showed a strong relationship
between these two (unweighted correlation of 0.56 and a weighted correlation of
0.64), indicating that the larger a program’s effect on drug-relapse the larger the
effect on recidivism (and vice versa), consistent with the notion that drug use
mediates criminality. This does not resolve, however, the counterintuitive finding of
lower drug-relapse effects. Two possibilities come to mind. First, although official
measures of recidivism are known to be only modestly reliable indicators of criminal
behavior, they may be more reliable than measures of drug-relapse. If this is true,
then the latter are attenuated to a greater degree than the former. Second, drug use
may not mediate the relationship between these programs and criminal behavior.
These programs may successfully change criminogenic attitudes, attachment of
antisocial peers, maladaptive cognitive processes, or other psychosocial character-
370
O. Mitchell, et al.

istics of the offenders that maintain or foster their criminality, and, to a lesser degree,
their drug use. Additional research is needed that examines the role of reducing an
offender’s drug use in reducing future non-drug-use criminal behavior.
We believe that the implications of this research for policy makers are clear.
Policy makers seeking effective interventions for incarcerated substance abusers are
most likely to find success with programs that focus on the multiple problems of
substance abusers in an intensive manner, such as TC programs. Policy makers
should expect smaller treatment benefits from less intensive treatment programs.
Further, there is no evidence that correctional boot camps targeted at substance
abusers reduce either post-release offending or drug use, and, thus, policy makers
should not expect these programs to produce reductions in recidivism.
We believe that this research also has implications for researchers. Specifically,
we believe that while the extant research clearly supports the effectiveness of certain
programs, there is a lack of understanding concerning which particular components
of treatment programs are most important and which combination of components are
most effective. Further, the general methodological weakness of this area of research
makes their findings vulnerable to alternative explanations (i.e., reductions in
recidivism could be due to factors other than the intervention). Beneficial future
research will address these issues.
Acknowledgments
We would like to gratefully acknowledge the Nordic Campbell Center and the Jerry
Lee Foundation for partial support of this project. We would also like to thank Matthew Makarios, who
helped code numerous evaluations.
References
*Anglin, M. D., Prendergast, M. L., Farabee, D., & Cartier, J. (2002). Final report on the substance abuse
program at the California Substance Abuse Treatment Facility and state prison at Corcoran. Los
Angeles, CA: The UCLA Integrated Substance Abuse Program.
*Aos, S. (2004). Washington State’s Family integrated transitions program for juvenile offenders:
Outcome evaluation and benefit-cost analysis. Olympia, WA: Washington State Institute for Public
Policy.
Begg, C. B., & Mazumdar, M. (1994). Operating characteristics of a rank correlation test for publication
bias. Biometrics, 50(4), 1088–1101.
Bennett, T. (1998). Drugs and crime: The results of research on drug testing and interviewing arrestees.
London: Home Office.
Berggren, O., & Svard, H. (1990). Osteraker Project: A further follow-up of the drug misuser treatment
programme at Osteraker Prison. Sweden: Swedish Prison and Probation Administration.
Bureau of Justice Assistance. (2005). Residential substance abuse treatment for state prisoners (RSAT)
program. Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Assistance.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. (1995). Drugs and crime facts, 1994: A summary of drug data published in
1994. Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Cooper, H., & Hedges, L. V. (Eds). (1994). The handbook of research synthesis. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
*Crundall, I., & Deacon, K. (1997). A prison-based alcohol use education program: Evaluation of a pilot
study. Substance Use & Misuse, 32(6), 767–777.
*Daley, M., Love, C. T., Shepard, D. S., Petersen, C. B., White, K. L., & Hall, F. B. (2004). Cost
effectiveness of Connecticut’s in-prison substance abuse treatment. Journal of Offender Rehabilita-
tion, 39(3), 69–92.
*Darabi, G. A. (1992). Psychological impact of tier programs: An outcome evaluation. Tallahassee, FL:
Bureau of Planning, Research, and Statistics.
Incarceration-based drug treatment
371

Dolan, K. A., Shearer, J., MacDonal, M., Mattick, R. P., Hall, W., & Wodak, A. D. (2003). A randomised
controlled trial of methadone maintenance treatment versus wait list control in an Australian prison
system. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 72(1), 59–65.
*Dowden, C., & Blanchette, K. (2002). An evaluation of the effectiveness of substance abuse
programming for female offenders. International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative
Criminology, 46(2), 220–230.
*Dugan, J. R., & Everett, R. S. (1998). An experimental test of chemical dependency therapy for jail
inmates. International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 42(4), 360–368.
Duvall, S., & Tweedie, R. (2000). A nonparametric “trim and fill” method of accounting for publication
bias in meta-analysis. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95(449), 89–98.
Dynia, P., & Sung, H.-E. (2000). The safety and effectiveness of diverting felony drug offenders to
residential treatment as measured by recidivism. Criminal Justice Policy Review, 11(4), 299–311.
Egger, M., Smith, G. D., Schneider, M., & Minder, C. (1997). Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple,
graphical test. British Medical Journal, 315, 629–634.
*Eisenberg, M., & Fabelo, T. (1996). Evaluation of the Texas correctional substance abuse treatment
initiative: The impact of policy research. Crime & Delinquency, 42(2), 296–308.
*Eisenberg, M., Riechers, L., & Arrigona, N. (2001). Evaluation of the performance of the Texas
Department of Criminal Justice Rehabilitation Tier programs. Austin, TX: Criminal Justice Policy
Council.
Farrington, D. P., Gottfredson, D. C., Sherman, L. W., & Welsh, B. C. (2006). The Maryland Scientific
Methods Scale. In L. W. Sherman, D. P. Farrington, B. C. Welsh, & D. L. MacKenzie (Eds),
Evidence-based crime prevention (pp. 13–21). New York, NY: Routledge.
Field, G. (1985). The Cornerstone program: A client outcome study. Federal Probation, 49(2), 50–55.
Field, G. (1989). A study of the effects of intensive treatment on reducing the criminal recidivism of
addicted offenders. Unpublished Manuscript: Oregon Correctional Treatment Programs.
*Finigan, M. W., Barron, N., & Carey, S. (2003). Effectively assessing and preparing inmates for
community substance abuse treatment: The Portland Target Cities Project in-jail intervention. In R. C.
Stephens, C. K. Scott, & R. D. Muck (Eds), Clinical assessment and substance abuse treatment: The
Target Cities experience (pp. 165–178). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Flanagan, C., Arsovska, J., Giaime, A. J., Goril, M., Kahl, C., Król, A., & Moore, B. (2004). Digest of
research on drug use and HIV/AIDS in prisons. London: The European Network for Drug Services in
Prison, Cranstoun Drug Services.
Gendreau, P., Little, T., & Goggin, C. (1996). A meta-analysis of the predictors of adult offender
recidivism: What works! Criminology, 34(4), 575–607.
*Gordon, J. A. (2002). Barrett Juvenile Correctional Center: Is it effective. Richmond, VA: Virginia
Commonwealth University.
*Gransky, L. A., & Jones, R. J. (1995). Evaluation of the post-release status of substance abuse program
participants. Chicago, IL: Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority.
Guerin, P. (2002). Outcome evaluation of the New Mexico Corrections Department Genesis Residential
Substance Abuse Treatment program for state prisoners. Albuquerque, NM: Institute for Social
Research, University of New Mexico.
*Hanson, G. (2000). Pine Lodge intensive inpatient treatment program. Olympia, WA: Planning and
Research Section, Washington State Department of Corrections.
*Hartmann, D. J., Wolk, J. L., Johnston, L. S., & Colyer, C. J. (1997). Recidivism and substance abuse
outcomes in a prison-based therapeutic community. Federal Probation, 61(4), 18–25.
Hasselblad, V., & Hedges, L. V. (1995). Meta-analysis of screening and diagnostic tests. Psychological
Bulletin, 117(1), 167–178.
Horney, J., Osgood, D. W., & Marshall, I. H. (1995). Criminal careers in the short-term: Intra-individual
variability in crime and its relation to local life circumstances. American Sociological Review, 60,
655–673.
*Hughey, R., & Klemke, L. W. (1996). Evaluation of a jail-based substance abuse treatment program.
Federal Probation, 60(4), 40–44.
*Hume, S., & Gorta, A. (1988). Results of community urinalyses for clients on the NSW Prison Methadone
Program. Sydney, NSW: Research and Statistics Division, NSW Department of Corrective Services.
*Hume, S., & Gorta, A. (1989). Effects of the N.S.W. prison methadone program on criminal recidivism
and retention in methadone treatment. New South Wales, Australia: New South Wales Department of
Corrective Services.
*Inciardi, J. A., Martin, S. S., Butzin, C. A., Hooper, R. M., & Harrison, L. D. (1997). An effective model
of prison-based treatment for drug-involved offenders. Journal of Drug Issues, 27(2), 261–279.
372
O. Mitchell, et al.

*Johnson, S. L., van de Ven, J. T. C., & Grant, B. A. (2001). Institutional methadone maintenance
treatment: Impact on release outcome and institutional behaviour (Research Rep. No. 119). Ottawa:
Research Branch, Correctional Service of Canada.
Karberg, J. C., & James, D. J. (2005). Substance dependence, abuse, and treatment of jail inmates, 2002.
Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics.
*Kelly, W. R. (2001). An outcome evaluation of the Texas Youth Commission’s Chemical Dependency
Treatment Program. Austin, TX: University of Texas.
*Kinlock, T. W., Battjes, R. J., & Schwartz, R, The MTC Project Team. (2005). A novel opioid
maintenance program for prisoners: Report of post-release outcomes. American Journal of Drug and
Alcohol Abuse, 31, 433–454.
*Klebe, K. J., & O’Keefe, M. (1998). Outcome evaluation of the Crossroads to Freedom House and Peer
I therapeutic communities. Colorado Springs, CO: University of Colorado.
Knight, K., & Hiller, M. L. (1997). Community-based substance abuse treatment: A 1-year outcome
evaluation of the Dallas County Judicial Treatment Center. Federal Probation, 61(2), 61–68.
*Knight, K., Simpson, D. D., & Hiller, M. (1999). Three-year reincarceration outcomes for in-prison
therapeutic community treatment in Texas. The Prison Journal, 79(3), 337–351.
Kooyman, M. (1993). The therapeutic community for addicts: intimacy, parent involvement, and treatment
success. Berwyn, PA: Swets & Zeitlinger.
*Kunitz, S. J., Woodall, W. G., Zhao, H., Wheeler, D. R., Lillis, R., & Rogers, E. (2002). Rearrest rates
after incarceration for DWI: A comparative study in a Southwestern US county. American Journal of
Public Health, 92(11), 1826–1831.
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Lipton, D. S., Falkin, G. P., & Wexler, H. K. (1992). Correctional drug abuse treatment in the United
States; An overview. In C. G. Leukefeld, and F. M. Tims (Eds), Drug abuse treatment in prisons and
jails. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
*Little, G. L., Robinson, K. D., & Burnette, K. D. (1991). Treating drug offenders with moral reconation
therapy: A three-year recidivism report. Psychological Reports, 69(3), 1151–1154.
MacKenzie, D. L., Browning, K., Skroban, S. S., & Smith, D. A. (1999). The impact of probation on the
criminal activities of offenders. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 36(4), 423–453.
Magura, S., Rosenblum, A. L. C., & Joseph, H. (1993). The effectiveness of in-jail methadone
maintenance. Journal of Drug Issues, 23(1), 75–99.
*Martin, C., Player, E., & Liriano, S. (2003). Results of evaluations of the RAPt drug treatment
programme. In M. Ramsey (Ed), Prisoners’ drug use and treatment: Sever research studies. London:
Home Office Research.
*Miller, J. M., & Koons-Witt, B. (2003). Outcome evaluation of the South Carolina residential substance
abuse treatment program for state prisoners. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina.
*Mosher, C., & Phillips, D. (2002). Final report on the program evaluation of the Pine Lodge Pre-Release
Residential Therapeutic Community for women offenders in Washington State. Pullman, WA:
Washington State University.
*Nash, J. E. (2000). Final report of outcomes for Ozark Correctional Center drug treatment program.
Springfield, MO: Center for Social Sciences and Public Policy Research.
*Oregon Department of Corrections. (1994). Comparison of outcomes and costs residential and outpatient
treatment programs for inmates alcohol and drug, mental health, sex offender, and social skills
treatment. Oregon: Oregon Department of Corrections.
Pealer, J. A., Latessa, E. J., & Winesburg, M. ( 2002). Final report: Mohican Youth Center RSAT outcome
evaluation. Cincinnati, OH: Center for Criminal Justice Research, University of Cincinnati.
Pearson, F. S., & Lipton, D. S. (1999). A meta-analytic review of the effectiveness of corrections-based
treatment for drug abuse. The Prison Journal, 79(4), 384–410.
*Pelissier, B., Rhodes, W., Saylor, W., Gaes, G., Camp, S. D., Vanyur, S. D., & Wallace, S. (2000). TRIAD
drug treatment evaluation project final report of three-year outcomes: Part I. Washington, D.C.:
Federal Bureau of Prisons, Office of Research and Evaluation.
Pernaen, K., Cousineau, M.-M., Brochu, S., & Sun, F. (2002). Proportions of crimes associated with
alcohol and other drugs in Canada. Ottawa: Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse.
*Peters, R. H., Kearns, W. D., Murrin, M. R., Dolente, A. S., & May, R. L. II. (1993). Examining the
effectiveness of in-jail substance abuse treatment. Journal of Offender Rehabilitation, 19(3/4), 1–39.
Pollock, J. M. (2004). Prisons and prison life: Costs and consequences. Los Angeles: Roxbury.
*Porporino, F. J., Robinson, D., Millson, B., & Weekes, J. R. (2002). An outcome evaluation of prison-
based treatment programming for substance users. Substance Use & Misuse, 37(8–10), 1047–1077.
*Porter, R. (2002). Breaking the cycle: technical report. New York: Vera Institute of Justice.
Incarceration-based drug treatment
373

*Prendergast, M., Hall, E., & Wellisch, J. (2003). An outcome evaluation of the Forever Free substance abuse
treatment program: One-year post-release outcomes. Santa Monica, CA: Drug Abuse Research Center.
Prendergast, M. L., Wellisch, J., & Wong, M. M. (1996). Residential treatment for women parolees
following prison-based drug treatment: Treatment experiences, needs and services, outcomes. The
Prison Journal, 76(3), 253–274.
Sánchez-Meca, J., Chacón-Moscoso, S., & Marín-Martínez, F. (2003). Effect-size indices for
dichotomized outcomes in meta-analysis. Psychological Methods, 8, 448–467.
Schippers, G. M., van den Hurk, A. A., Breteler, M. H. M., & Meerkerk, G.-J. (1998). Effectiveness of a
drug-fee detention treatment program in a Dutch prison. Substance Use & Misuse, 33(4), 1027–1046.
*Sealock, M. D., Gottfredson, D. C., & Gallagher, C. A. (1997). Drug treatment for juvenile offenders:
Some good and bad news. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 34(2), 210–236.
Shaw, J. W., & MacKenzie, D. L. (1992). The one-year community supervision performance of drug
offenders and Louisiana DOC-identified substance abusers graduating from shock incarceration.
Journal of Criminal Justice, 20(6), 501–516.
Shewan, D., Macpherson, A., Reid, M. M., & Davies, J. B. (1996). The impact of the Edinburgh prison
drug reduction programme. Legal and Criminological Psychology, 1(1), 83–94.
*Siegal, H. A., Wang, J., Falck, R. S., Rahman, A. M., & Carlson, R. G. (1997). An evaluation of Ohio’s
prison-based therapeutic community treatment programs for substance abusers: Final report. Dayton,
OH: Wright State University, School of Medicine.
*Smith, C. J. (1996). The California Civil Addict program: An evaluation of implementation and
effectiveness. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Irvine, Ann Arbor, MI.
Swartz, J. A., Lurigio, A. J., & Slomka, S. (1996). The impact of IMPACT: An assessment of the effectiveness
of the Cook County Jail’s substance abuse treatment program. Crime and Delinquency, 42(4), 553–573.
*Taxman, F. S., & Spinner, D. L. (1996). The Jail Addiction Services (JAS) project in Montgomery
County, Maryland. College Park, MD: University of Maryland.
*Tunis, S., Austin, J., Morris, M., Hardyman, P., & Bolyard, M. (1995). Evaluation of drug treatment in
local corrections: Final report. San Francisco, CA: National Council on Crime and Delinquency.
*Turley, A., Thornton, T., Johnson, C., & Azzolino, S. (2004). Jail drug and alcohol treatment program
reduces recidivism in nonviolent offenders: A longitudinal study of Monroe County, New York’s, jail
treatment drug and alcohol program. International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative
Criminology, 48(6), 721–728.
*Van Stelle, K. R., & Moberg, D. P. (2000). Outcome evaluation of the Wisconsin Residential Substance
Abuse Treatmen program: The mental illness-chemical abuse (MICA) program at Oshkosh
Correctional Institution, 1998–2000. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Medical School.
*Vaughn, M. S., Deng, F., & Lee, L.-J. (2003). Evaluating a prison-based drug treatment program in
Taiwan. Journal of Drug Issues, 33(2), 357–384.
*Voas, R. B., & Tippetts, A. S. (1990). Evaluation of treatment and monitoring programs for drunken
drivers. Journal of Traffic Medicine, 18, 15–26.
*Washington State Department of Corrections. (1988). Substance abuse treatment program evaluation of
outcomes and management report. Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Corrections.
Weisburd, D., Lum, C. M., & Petrosino, A. (2001). Does research design affect study outcomes in
criminal justice. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, 578, 50–70.
*Welsh, W. N. (2002). Evaluation of prison based drug treatment in Pennsylvania. Philadelphia, PA:
Temple University.
*Wexler, H. K., Falkin, G. P., & Lipton, D. S. (1990). Outcome evaluation of a prison therapeutic
community for substance abuse treatment. Criminal Justice and Behaviors, 17(1), 71–92.
*Wexler, H. K., Melnick, G., Lowe, L., & Peters, J. (1999). Three-year reincarceration outcomes for
Amity in-prison therapeutic community and aftercare in California. Prison Journal, 79(3), 321–336.
Wilson, D. B., & MacKenzie, D. L. (2006). Boot camps. In B. C. Welsh & D. F. Farrington (Eds), Preventing
crime: What works for children, offenders, victims, and places (pp. 73–86). New York: Springer.
Wilson, D. B., MacKenzie, D. L., & Mitchell, F. N. (2005). Effects of correctional boot camps on
offending. A Campbell Collaboration systematic review: Available at: http://www.aic.gov.au/
campbellcj/reviews/published.html.
*Winesburg, M., Latessa, E. J., & Pealer, J. A. (2002). Final report: Noble Choices RSAT outcome
evaluation. Cincinnati, OH: Center for Criminal Justice Research, University of Cincinnati.
*Zhang, S. (2000). An evaluation of the Los Angeles County juvenile drug treatment boot camp: Final
report. San Marcos, CA: California State University.
Zhang, Z. (2003). Drug and alcohol use and related matters among arrestees, 2003. Washington, DC:
Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring Program.
374
O. Mitchell, et al.

Ojmarrh Mitchell is an assistant professor of Criminal Justice at the University of Cincinnati. Professor
Mitchell earned his Ph.D. in Criminal Justice and Criminology from the University of Maryland with a
doctoral minor in Measurement, Statistics, and Evaluation. His research interests include deviant self-
identity, evaluation of correctional programs, race and sentencing, drugs and crime, measurement theory,
and meta-analysis.
David B. Wilson, Ph.D. is an associate professor in the Administration of Justice Program at George
Mason University. His research interests are the effectiveness of offender rehabilitation and crime
prevention efforts, program evaluation methodology, quantitative methods, and meta-analysis.
Doris Layton MacKenzie is a professor of Criminology and Criminal Justice at the University of
Maryland. Her most recent book is titled “What Works In Corrections: Examining the Criminal Activities
of Offenders and Delinquents” (2006, Cambridge University Press). The work summarizes systematic
reviews and meta-analyses of evaluations of correctional management strategies and rehabilitation
programs. She has co-edited two recent books: “Correctional Boot Camps: Military Basic Training or a
Model for corrections?” (2004, Sage Publications) and “Different Crimes, Different Criminals” (2006,
Lexis/Nexis/Anderson). She has testified before US Senate and House committees and was invited to
present her work at the United Nations, Vienna. She is a fellow and currently president-elect of the
Academy of Experimental Criminology, vice-president of the American Society of Criminology (ASC)
and past chair of the Division on Corrections and Sentencing, ASC. She has received the ASC Bloch and
the Most Distinguished Scientist award from the Division on Corrections and Sentencing, ASC. In 2007,
as a Fulbright Research Scholar, she is examining China’s new community corrections programs.
Incarceration-based drug treatment
375

